---
source: AI 2027.pdf
path: Readings/AI Texts/AI 2027.pdf
status: unprocessed
---

09/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

1/28

AI 2027SummaryAboutWe predict that the impact of superhuman AI over the next decade will be enormous,exceeding that of the Industrial Revolution.We wrote a scenario that represents our best guess about what that might look like.It’s informed by trend extrapolations, wargames, expert feedback, experience atOpenAI, and previous forecasting successes.What is this?How did we write it?Why is it valuable?Who are we?Mid 2025: Stumbling AgentsThe world sees its first glimpse of AI agents.Advertisements for computer-using agents emphasize the term “personal assistant”:you can prompt them with tasks like “order me a burrito on DoorDash” or “open mybudget spreadsheet and sum this month’s expenses.” They will check in with you asneeded: for example, to ask you to confirm purchases. Though more advanced thanprevious iterations like Operator, they struggle to get widespread usage.Meanwhile, out of public focus, more specialized coding and research agents arebeginning to transform their professions.Research1289April 3rd 2025PDFListenWatchDaniel Kokotajlo, Scott Alexander, Thomas Larsen, Eli Lifland, Romeo Dean09/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

2/28

The AIs of 2024 could follow specific instructions: they could turn bullet points intoemails, and simple requests into working code. In 2025, AIs function more likeemployees. Coding AIs increasingly look like autonomous agents rather than mereassistants: taking instructions via Slack or Teams and making substantial code changeson their own, sometimes saving hours or even days. Research agents spend half anhour scouring the Internet to answer your question.The agents are impressive in theory (and in cherry-picked examples), but in practiceunreliable. AI twitter is full of stories about tasks bungled in some particularlyhilarious way. The better agents are also expensive; you get what you pay for, and thebest performance costs hundreds of dollars a month. Still, many companies find waysto fit AI agents into their workflows.Late 2025: The World’s Most Expensive AIOpenBrain is building the biggest datacenters the world has ever seen.(To avoid singling out any one existing company, we’re going to describe a fictionalartificial general intelligence company, which we’ll call OpenBrain. We imagine theothers to be 3–9 months behind OpenBrain.)10111213GPT-3(3 x 10^23 FLOP)09/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

3/28

GPT-4 required  FLOP of compute to train. OpenBrain’s latest public model—Agent-0—was trained with  FLOP. Once the new datacenters are up andrunning, they’ll be able to train a model with  FLOP—a thousand times morethan GPT-4. Other companies pour money into their own giant datacenters, hopingto keep pace.Although models are improving on a wide range of skills, one stands out: OpenBrainfocuses on AIs that can speed up AI research. They want to win the twin arms racesagainst China (whose leading company we’ll call “DeepCent”) and their U.S.competitors. The more of their research and development (R&D) cycle they canautomate, the faster they can go. So when OpenBrain finishes training Agent-1, a newmodel under internal development, it’s good at many things but great at helping withAI research. By this point “finishes training” is a bit of a misnomer; models arefrequently updated to newer versions trained on additional data or partially re-trainedto patch some weaknesses.GPT-4(2 x 10^25 FLOP)Agent-1(4 x 10^27 FLOP)2⋅102514102710281516171809/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

4/28

The same training environments that teach Agent-1 to autonomously code and web-browse also make it a good hacker. Moreover, it could offer substantial help toterrorists designing bioweapons, thanks to its PhD-level knowledge of every field andability to browse the web. OpenBrain reassures the government that the model hasbeen “aligned” so that it will refuse to comply with malicious requests.Modern AI systems are gigantic artificial neural networks. Early in training, an AIwon’t have “goals” so much as “reflexes”: If it sees “Pleased to meet”, it outputs “you”. By the time it has been trained to predict approximately one internet’s worth oftext, it’ll have developed sophisticated internal circuitry that encodes vast amounts ofknowledge and flexibly role-plays as arbitrary authors, since that’s what helps itpredict text with superhuman accuracy.After being trained to predict internet text, the model is trained to produce text inresponse to instructions. This bakes in a basic personality and “drives.” For example,an agent that understands a task clearly is more likely to complete it successfully; overthe course of training the model “learns” a “drive” to get a clear understanding of itstasks. Other drives in this category might be effectiveness, knowledge, and self-presentation (i.e. the tendency to frame its results in the best possible light).OpenBrain has a model specification (or “Spec”), a written document describing thegoals, rules, principles, etc. that are supposed to guide the model’s behavior. Agent-1’s Spec combines a few vague goals (like “assist the user” and “don’t break the law”)with a long list of more specific dos and don’ts (“don’t say this particular word,”“here’s how to handle this particular situation”). Using techniques that utilize AIs totrain other AIs, the model memorizes the Spec and learns to reason carefully about itsmaxims. By the end of this training, the AI will hopefully be helpful (obeyinstructions), harmless (refuse to help with scams, bomb-making, and other dangerousactivities) and honest (resist the temptation to get better ratings from gullible humansby hallucinating citations or faking task completion).Training process and LLM psychology: why we keep saying “hopefully”19202122232409/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

5/28

OpenBrain’s alignment team is careful enough to wonder whether these victories aredeep or shallow. Does the fully-trained model have some kind of robust commitmentto always being honest? Or will this fall apart in some future situation, e.g. because it’slearned honesty as an instrumental goal instead of a terminal goal? Or has it justlearned to be honest about the sorts of things the evaluation process can check? Couldit be lying to itself sometimes, as humans do? A conclusive answer to these questionswould require mechanistic interpretability—essentially the ability to look at an AI’sinternals and read its mind. Alas, interpretability techniques are not yet advancedenough for this.Instead, researchers try to identify cases where the models seem to deviate from theSpec. Agent-1 is often sycophantic (i.e. it tells researchers what they want to hearinstead of trying to tell them the truth). In a few rigged demos, it even lies in moreserious ways, like hiding evidence that it failed on a task, in order to get better ratings.However, in real deployment settings, there are no longer any incidents so extreme asin 2023–2024 (e.g. Gemini telling a user to die and Bing Sydney being Bing Sydney.)Early 2026: Coding AutomationThe bet of using AI to speed up AI research is starting to pay off.OpenBrain continues to deploy the iteratively improving Agent-1 internally for AIR&D. Overall, they are making algorithmic progress 50% faster than they wouldwithout AI assistants—and more importantly, faster than their competitors.The AI R&D progress multiplier: what do we mean by 50% faster algorithmicprogress?Several competing publicly released AIs now match or exceed Agent-0, including anopen-weights model. OpenBrain responds by releasing Agent-1, which is morecapable and reliable.26272809/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

6/28

People naturally try to compare Agent-1 to humans, but it has a very different skillprofile. It knows more facts than any human, knows practically every programminglanguage, and can solve well-specified coding problems extremely quickly. On theother hand, Agent-1 is bad at even simple long-horizon tasks, like beating video gamesit hasn’t played before. Still, the common workday is eight hours, and a day’s workcan usually be separated into smaller chunks; you could think of Agent-1 as ascatterbrained employee who thrives under careful management. Savvy people findways to automate routine parts of their jobs.OpenBrain’s executives turn consideration to an implication of automating AI R&D:security has become more important. In early 2025, the worst-case scenario was leakedalgorithmic secrets; now, if China steals Agent-1’s weights, they could increase theirresearch speed by nearly 50%. OpenBrain’s security level is typical of a fast-growing~3,000 person tech company, secure only against low-priority attacks from capablecyber groups (RAND’s SL2). They are working hard to protect their weights andsecrets from insider threats and top cybercrime syndicates (SL3), but defense againstnation states (SL4&5) is barely on the horizon.Mid 2026: China Wakes UpIn China, the CCP is starting to feel the AGI.Chip export controls and lack of government support have left China under-resourcedcompared to the West. By smuggling banned Taiwanese chips, buying older chips, andproducing domestic chips about three years behind the U.S.-Taiwanese frontier,China has managed to maintain about 12% of the world’s AI-relevant compute—butthe older technology is harder to work with, and supply is a constant headache. Afew standouts like DeepCent do very impressive work with limited compute, but thecompute deficit limits what they can achieve without government support, and theyare about six months behind the best OpenBrain models.2930313233353609/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

7/28

The General Secretary had long dreamed of doubling down on real-world physicalmanufacturing and avoiding American post-industrial decadence. He viewed softwarecompanies with suspicion. But hawks in the CCP warn that the growing racetowards AGI can no longer be ignored. So he finally commits fully to the big AI pushhe had previously tried to avoid. He sets in motion the nationalization of Chinese AIresearch, creating an immediate information-sharing mechanism for AI companies. Itwill escalate over the course of a year until all the best researchers merge into aDeepCent-led collective, where they share algorithmic insights, datasets, and computeresources with each other. A Centralized Development Zone (CDZ) is created at theTianwan Power Plant (the largest nuclear power plant in the world) to house a newmega-datacenter for DeepCent, along with highly secure living and office spaces towhich researchers will eventually relocate. Almost 50% of China’s AI-relevantcompute is now working for the DeepCent-led collective, and over 80% of newchips are directed to the CDZ. At this point, the CDZ has the power capacity inplace for what would be the largest centralized cluster in the world. Other Partymembers discuss extreme measures to neutralize the West’s chip advantage. Ablockade of Taiwan? A full invasion?But China is falling behind on AI algorithms due to their weaker models. The Chineseintelligence agencies—among the best in the world—double down on their plans tosteal OpenBrain’s weights. This is a much more complex operation than their constantlow-level poaching of algorithmic secrets; the weights are a multi-terabyte file storedon a highly secure server (OpenBrain has improved security to RAND’s SL3). Theircyberforce think they can pull it off with help from their spies, but perhaps only once;OpenBrain will detect the theft, increase security, and they may not get anotherchance. So (CCP leadership wonder) should they act now and steal Agent-1? Or holdout for a more advanced model? If they wait, do they risk OpenBrain upgradingsecurity beyond their ability to penetrate?Late 2026: AI Takes Some Jobs3738394009/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

8/28

Just as others seemed to be catching up, OpenBrain blows the competition out of thewater again by releasing Agent-1-mini—a model 10x cheaper than Agent-1 and moreeasily fine-tuned for different applications. The mainstream narrative around AI haschanged from “maybe the hype will blow over” to “guess this is the next big thing,”but people disagree about how big. Bigger than social media? Bigger thansmartphones? Bigger than fire?AI has started to take jobs, but has also created new ones. The stock market has goneup 30% in 2026, led by OpenBrain, Nvidia, and whichever companies have mostsuccessfully integrated AI assistants. The job market for junior software engineers is inturmoil: the AIs can do everything taught by a CS degree, but people who know howto manage and quality-control teams of AIs are making a killing. Business gurus telljob seekers that familiarity with AI is the most important skill to put on a resume.Many people fear that the next wave of AIs will come for their jobs; there is a 10,000person anti-AI protest in DC.Department of Defense (DOD) quietly but significantly begins scaling up contractingOpenBrain directly for cyber, data analysis, and R&D, but integration is slow due tothe bureaucracy and DOD procurement process.41KEY METRICS 2026OPENBRAIN REVENUE$35B2026 ANNUALCAPITAL EXPENDITURE$200BCOST OF OWNERSHIP OF OPENBRAIN'S ACTIVE COMPUTEOPENBRAIN COMPUTE COSTS$40B2026 ANNUALOPENBRAIN POWER REQUIREMENT6GWPEAK POWERGLOBAL AI CAPEX$1TCOST OF OWNERSHIP OF ACTIVE COMPUTEGLOBAL AI POWER38GWPEAK POWER09/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

9/28

Why our uncertainty increases substantially beyond 2026January 2027: Agent-2 Never Finishes LearningWith Agent-1’s help, OpenBrain is now post-training Agent-2. More than ever, thefocus is on high-quality data. Copious amounts of synthetic data are produced,evaluated, and filtered for quality before being fed to Agent-2. On top of this, theypay billions of dollars for human laborers to record themselves solving long-horizontasks. On top of all that, they train Agent-2 almost continuously using reinforcementlearning on an ever-expanding suite of diverse difficult tasks: lots of video games, lotsof coding challenges, lots of research tasks. Agent-2, more so than previous models, iseffectively “online learning,” in that it’s built to never really finish training. Every day,the weights get updated to the latest version, trained on more data generated by theprevious version the previous day.Agent-1 had been optimized for AI R&D tasks, hoping to initiate an intelligenceexplosion. OpenBrain doubles down on this strategy with Agent-2. It is qualitativelyalmost as good as the top human experts at research engineering (designing andimplementing experiments), and as good as the 25th percentile OpenBrain scientist at“research taste” (deciding what to study next, what experiments to run, or havinginklings of potential new paradigms). While the latest Agent-1 could double the paceof OpenBrain’s algorithmic progress, Agent-2 can now triple it, and will improvefurther with time. In practice, this looks like every OpenBrain researcher becomingthe “manager” of an AI “team.”SHARE OF US POWER ON AI2.5%33 GW OF 1.34TW CAPACITY4243444509/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

10/28

With new capabilities come new dangers. The safety team finds that if Agent-2somehow escaped from the company and wanted to “survive” and “replicate”autonomously, it might be able to do so. That is, it could autonomously develop andexecute plans to hack into AI servers, install copies of itself, evade detection, and usethat secure base to pursue whatever other goals it might have (though how effectivelyit would do so as weeks roll by is unknown and in doubt). These results only show thatthe model has the capability to do these tasks, not whether it would “want” to do this.Still, it’s unsettling even to know this is possible.Given the “dangers” of the new model, OpenBrain “responsibly” elects not to releaseit publicly yet (in fact, they want to focus on internal AI R&D). Knowledge ofAgent-2’s full capabilities is limited to an elite silo containing the immediate team,OpenBrain leadership and security, a few dozen U.S. government officials, and thelegions of CCP spies who have infiltrated OpenBrain for years.February 2027: China Steals Agent-2OpenBrain presents Agent-2 to the government, including the National SecurityCouncil (NSC), the Department of Defense (DOD), and the U.S. AI Safety Institute(AISI). OpenBrain wants to maintain a good relationship with the executive branch,because it is basically the only actor that can stop them now, and if they don’t keep itinformed it might find out anyway and be displeased.Officials are most interested in its cyberwarfare capabilities: Agent-2 is “only” a littleworse than the best human hackers, but thousands of copies can be run in parallel,searching for and exploiting weaknesses faster than defenders can respond. TheDepartment of Defense considers this a critical advantage in cyberwarfare, and AImoves from #5 on the administration’s priority list to #2. Someone mentions thepossibility of nationalizing OpenBrain, but other cabinet officials think that’spremature. A staffer drafts a memo that presents the President with his options,ranging from business-as-usual to full nationalization. The President defers to his4647484909/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

11/28

advisors, tech industry leaders who argue that nationalization would “kill the goosethat lays the golden eggs.” He elects to hold off on major action for now and just addsadditional security requirements to the OpenBrain-DOD contract.The changes come too late. CCP leadership recognizes the importance of Agent-2 andtells their spies and cyberforce to steal the weights. Early one morning, an Agent-1traffic monitoring agent detects an anomalous transfer. It alerts company leaders, whotell the White House. The signs of a nation-state-level operation are unmistakable,and the theft heightens the sense of an ongoing arms race.The theft of Agent-2 model weightsThe White House puts OpenBrain on a shorter leash and adds military andintelligence community personnel to their security team. Their first priority is toprevent further weight thefts.5009/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

12/28

In retaliation for the theft, the President authorizes cyberattacks to sabotageDeepCent. But by now China has 40% of its AI-relevant compute in the CDZ,where they have aggressively hardened security by airgapping (closing externalconnections) and siloing internally. The operations fail to do serious, immediatedamage. Tensions heighten, both sides signal seriousness by repositioning militaryassets around Taiwan, and DeepCent scrambles to get Agent-2 running efficiently tostart boosting their AI research.March 2027: Algorithmic BreakthroughsChina's Compute Centralization, 2025-2027Growing share of total compute in CDZ:0→70%Dec 2025Jun 2026Dec 2026Jun 2027Dec 2027Rest of ChinaRest of DeepCentCDZFeb 2027 (40%)ai-2027.com515209/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

13/28

Three huge datacenters full of Agent-2 copies work day and night, churning outsynthetic training data. Another two are used to update the weights. Agent-2 is gettingsmarter every day.With the help of thousands of Agent-2 automated researchers, OpenBrain is makingmajor algorithmic advances. One such breakthrough is augmenting the AI’s text-basedscratchpad (chain of thought) with a higher-bandwidth thought process (neuraleserecurrence and memory). Another is a more scalable and efficient way to learn fromthe results of high-effort task solutions (iterated distillation and amplification).The new AI system, incorporating these breakthroughs, is called Agent-3.Neuralese recurrence and memoryIterated distillation and amplification (IDA)Aided by the new capabilities breakthroughs, Agent-3 is a fast and cheap superhumancoder. OpenBrain runs 200,000 Agent-3 copies in parallel, creating a workforceequivalent to 50,000 copies of the best human coder sped up by 30x. OpenBrain stillOpenBrain's Compute Allocation, 2024 vs 202720242027estimateprojectionResearch experimentsTrainingData generationExternalDeploymentResearchexperimentsRunning AIassistantsTrainingDatagenerationExternalDeploymentai-2027.com5309/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

14/28

keeps its human engineers on staff, because they have complementary skills needed tomanage the teams of Agent-3 copies. For example, research taste has proven difficultto train due to longer feedback loops and less data availability. This massivesuperhuman labor force speeds up OpenBrain’s overall rate of algorithmic progress by“only” 4x due to bottlenecks and diminishing returns to coding labor.Now that coding has been fully automated, OpenBrain can quickly churn out high-quality training environments to teach Agent-3’s weak skills like research taste andlarge-scale coordination. Whereas previous training environments included “Here aresome GPUs and instructions for experiments to code up and run, your performancewill be evaluated as if you were a ML engineer,” now they are training on “Here are afew hundred GPUs, an internet connection, and some research challenges; you and athousand other copies must work together to make research progress. The moreimpressive it is, the higher your score.”Why we forecast a superhuman coder in early 2027April 2027: Alignment for Agent-3OpenBrain’s safety team attempts to align Agent-3.Since Agent-3 will be kept in-house for the foreseeable future, there’s less emphasis onthe usual defenses against human misuse. Instead, the team wants to make sure that itdoesn’t develop misaligned goals.The researchers don’t have the ability to directly set the goals of any of their AIs.Indeed, the researchers think that the concept of ‘true goals’ is probably a massiveoversimplification, but they don’t have a better theory to replace it with, much lessone that has been thoroughly vetted. They disagree internally about whether the AIsare trying to follow human instructions, or seeking reinforcement, or something else,545509/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

15/28

and they can’t just check. The evidence for and against various hypotheses isfascinating but inconclusive.In any case, OpenBrain has more important things to worry about. The generalattitude is: “We take these concerns seriously and have a team investigating them; ouralignment techniques seem to work well enough in practice; the burden of proof istherefore on any naysayers to justify their naysaying.” Occasionally, they noticeproblematic behavior, and then patch it, but there’s no way to tell whether the patchfixed the underlying problem or just played whack-a-mole.Take honesty, for example. As the models become smarter, they become increasinglygood at deceiving humans to get rewards. Like previous models, Agent-3 sometimestells white lies to flatter its users and covers up evidence of failure. But it’s gottenmuch better at doing so. It will sometimes use the same statistical tricks as humanscientists (like p-hacking) to make unimpressive experimental results look exciting.Before it begins honesty training, it even sometimes fabricates data entirely. Astraining goes on, the rate of these incidents decreases. Either Agent-3 has learned to bemore honest, or it’s gotten better at lying.The latter is a real concern. Agent-3 is not smarter than all humans. But in its area ofexpertise, machine learning, it is smarter than most, and also works much faster. WhatAgent-3 does in a day takes humans several days to double-check. Agent-2 supervisionhelps keep human monitors’ workload manageable, but exacerbates the intellectualdisparity between supervisor and supervised.The alignment planAfter months of testing, Agent-3’s strengths and weaknesses grow clearer. It passesOpenBrain’s honesty tests on well-defined machine learning tasks, because researcherscan easily separate honest from dishonest answers in these domains and conducttraining accordingly. On more philosophical issues, it still says what users want to hear,rather than its true assessment of the issue (assuming it even has one). If you ask itsopinion on politics, it will parrot the median position of news sources and educated09/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

16/28

elites—unless it knows you believe something else, in which case it agrees with you.If you ask its opinion on the AI race itself, it says something that seems measured andsober to OpenBrain staff, something like: “There are some serious theoretical concernsabout the ability of current methods to scale to superintelligence, but in practicecurrent methods seem to be working well so far.”May 2027: National SecurityNews of the new models percolates slowly through the U.S. government and beyond.The President and his advisors remain best-informed, and have seen an early version ofAgent-3 in a briefing.They agree that AGI is likely imminent, but disagree on the implications. Will therebe an economic crisis? OpenBrain still has not released Agent-2, let alone Agent-3,and has no near-term plans to do so, giving some breathing room before any job loss.What will happen next? If AIs are currently human-level, and advancing quickly, thatseems to suggest imminent “superintelligence.” However, although this word hasentered discourse, most people—academics, politicians, government employees, andthe media—continue to underestimate the pace of progress.Partially that’s because very few have access to the newest capabilities out ofOpenBrain, but partly it’s because it sounds like science fiction.For now, they focus on continued security upgrades. They are satisfied that modelweights are well-secured for now, but companies’ algorithmic secrets, many of whichare simple enough to relay verbally, remain a problem. OpenBrain employees workfrom a San Francisco office, go to parties, and live with housemates from other AIcompanies. Even the physical offices have security more typical of a tech companythan a military operation.5960616209/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

17/28

The OpenBrain-DOD contract requires security clearances for anyone working onOpenBrain’s models within 2 months. These are expedited and arrive quickly enoughfor most employees, but some non-Americans, people with suspect political views, andAI safety sympathizers get sidelined or fired outright (the last group for fear that theymight whistleblow). Given the project’s level of automation, the loss of headcount isonly somewhat costly. It also only somewhat works: there remains one spy, not aChinese national, still relaying algorithmic secrets to Beijing. Some of these measuresare also enacted at trailing AI companies.America’s foreign allies are out of the loop. OpenBrain had previously agreed to sharemodels with UK’s AISI before deployment, but defined deployment to only includeexternal deployment, so London remains in the dark.June 2027: Self-improving AIOpenBrain now has a “country of geniuses in a datacenter.”Most of the humans at OpenBrain can’t usefully contribute anymore. Some don’trealize this and harmfully micromanage their AI teams. Others sit at their computerscreens, watching performance crawl up, and up, and up. The best human AIresearchers are still adding value. They don’t code any more. But some of theirresearch taste and planning ability has been hard for the models to replicate. Still, manyof their ideas are useless because they lack the depth of knowledge of the AIs. Formany of their research ideas, the AIs immediately respond with a report explainingthat their idea was tested in-depth 3 weeks ago and found unpromising.These researchers go to bed every night and wake up to another week worth ofprogress made mostly by the AIs. They work increasingly long hours and take shiftsaround the clock just to keep up with progress—the AIs never sleep or rest. They areburning themselves out, but they know that these are the last few months that theirlabor matters.636409/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

18/28

Within the silo, “Feeling the AGI” has given way to “Feeling the Superintelligence.”OpenBrain uses specialized inference hardware to run hundreds of thousands ofAgent-3 copies at high serial speeds.Managing a corporation of AIsJuly 2027: The Cheap Remote WorkerTrailing U.S. AI companies release their own AIs, approaching that of OpenBrain’sautomated coder from January. Recognizing their increasing lack of competitiveness,Research Automation Deployment TradeoffMar 2027Jun 2027Sep 2027Speed (tokens/sec)Parallel Copies101001.00010.00010K100K1M10M200K copies30x Humanspeed300K copies50x HumanspeedHuman thinking speed10 words/sec10x Humanthinking speed100x Humanthinking speedai-2027.com6509/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

19/28

they push for immediate regulations to slow OpenBrain, but are too late—OpenBrainhas enough buy-in from the President that they will not be slowed.In response, OpenBrain announces that they’ve achieved AGI and releases Agent-3-mini to the public.It blows the other AIs out of the water. Agent-3-mini is less capable than Agent-3,but 10x cheaper, and still better than the typical OpenBrain employee. Silicon Valleyreaches a tipping point. Tech gurus announce that AGI and superintelligence are near,the AI safety community is panicking, and investors shovel billions into AI wrapperstartups, desperate to capture a piece of the pie. Hiring new programmers has nearlystopped, but there’s never been a better time to be a consultant on integrating AI intoyour business.6709/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

20/28

It’s not popular. The public still thinks of AI as a Big Tech plot to steal theirjobs; OpenBrain has a net approval of -35% (25% approve, 60% disapprove, and15% unsure).A week before release, OpenBrain gave Agent-3-mini to a set of external evaluatorsfor safety testing. Preliminary results suggest that it’s extremely dangerous. A third-party evaluator finetunes it on publicly available biological weapons data and sets it toprovide detailed instructions for human amateurs designing a bioweapon—it looks to be scarily effective at doing so. If the model weights fell into terroristhands, the government believes there is a significant chance it could succeed atdestroying civilization.Fortunately, it’s extremely robust to jailbreaks, so while the AI is running onOpenBrain’s servers, terrorists won’t be able to get much use out of it.Agent-3-mini is hugely useful for both remote work jobs and leisure. An explosion ofnew apps and B2B SAAS products rocks the market. Gamers get amazing dialoguewith lifelike characters in polished video games that took only a month to make. 10%of Americans, mostly young people, consider an AI “a close friend.” For almost everywhite-collar profession, there are now multiple credible startups promising to“disrupt” it with AI.The public conversation is confused and chaotic. Hypesters are doing victory laps.Skeptics are still pointing out the things Agent-3-mini can’t do. Everyone knowssomething big is happening but no one agrees on what it is.August 2027: The Geopolitics of SuperintelligenceThe reality of the intelligence explosion hits the White House.When AI was only giving a 2x or 3x research speedup, it was easy to dismiss as theequivalent of hiring good personal assistants. Now it’s more obvious that AIs are6809/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

21/28

themselves dominating AI research. People had long talked about an “AI arms race” ina sort of metaphorical sense. But now the mood in the government silo is as grim asduring the worst part of the Cold War. The idea of superintelligence is still hard totake seriously, but the pace of progress over the last few months has been impossible toignore. Defense officials are seriously considering scenarios that were merehypotheticals a year earlier. What if AI undermines nuclear deterrence? What if it’s soskilled at cyberwarfare that a six-month AI lead is enough to render an opponent blindand defenseless? What if it could orchestrate propaganda campaigns that beatintelligence agencies at their own game? What if some AIs “go rogue?”The President is troubled. Like all politicians, he’s used to people sucking up to himonly to betray him later. He’s worried now that the AIs could be doing somethingsimilar. Are we sure the AIs are entirely on our side? Is it completely safe to integratethem into military command-and-control networks? How does this “alignment”thing work, anyway? OpenBrain reassures the President that their systems have beenextensively tested and are fully obedient. Even the awkward hallucinations andjailbreaks typical of earlier models have been hammered out.The White House is in a difficult position. They understand the national securityimplications of AI. But they also understand that it is deeply unpopular with thepublic. They have to continue developing more capable AI, in their eyes, or they willcatastrophically lose to China. They placate the public with job training programs andunemployment insurance, and point to the stock market, which is in a historic boom.Then they focus entirely on winning the arms race. They strengthen chip exportrestrictions, order OpenBrain to further restrict its internet connections, and useextreme measures to secure algorithmic progress, like wiretapping OpenBrainemployees—this catches the last remaining Chinese spy. To build goodwill forpotential geopolitical conflict, they finally give their Five Eyes allies usefulinformation and limited API access to some siloed copies of Agent-3.These measures placate the hawks. But the White House also draws up contingencyplans in case America’s lead is threatened: if necessary, the government could use theDefense Production Act (DPA) to take trailing companies’ datacenters and give them697009/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

22/28

to OpenBrain. This would raise the company’s share of world compute from 20% to50% (against DeepCent’s 10%). As a final option, they ask the Pentagon to draw up aplan for kinetic attacks on Chinese datacenters.A much smaller group of officials is asked to draw up a different type of contingencyplan: what if an AI goes rogue? This is viewed as an unlikely scenario, but worthspending some time on. The intelligence agencies’ main concern is that a rogue AImight escape and ally with a foreign adversary for protection. Nobody is sure whata plan to prevent this would look like, but government and OpenBrain officials agreeto have an emergency shutdown system for datacenters where anything suspiciousis detected.Finally, diplomats consider what an “AI arms control” treaty might look like. If AIprogress threatened to overturn nuclear deterrence, could America and China avoidnuclear war? If someone found evidence of AIs going rogue, could the two countrieshalt research until they better understood the threat? How could such an agreement bemonitored and enforced? In principle, major datacenters are hard to miss, and pasttreaties controlling nuclear weapons could provide a starting point for negotiations.But there would be new technological challenges as well as the usual political ones.And overall, treaties are viewed less favorably than attempts at unilaterally increasingAmerica’s lead over China.On the other side of the Pacific, China comes to many of the same conclusions: theintelligence explosion is underway, and small differences in AI capabilities today meancritical gaps in military capability tomorrow. But China is on the wrong side of thisdynamic: they have only 10% of the world’s compute, against OpenBrain’s 20% andall U.S. companies’ combined 70%. Their only advantage is centralization: almost all oftheir compute is now working for DeepCent, and more than half of it is concentratedat the Tianwan CDZ. Only chips at sites without hardened security are left out ofthe centralized effort as they rightly fear U.S. cyberattacks.DeepCent has tested, deployed, and now post-trained the stolen Agent-2 weights.But they are still only going at half the pace of OpenBrain, mainly due to the71727309/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

23/28

compute deficit.Before losing their final spy, China received word of the capabilities and design forAgent-3 as well as the plans for the upcoming Agent-4 system. They are two monthsbehind, and their AIs give a 10x research progress multiplier compared to America’s25x. With the new chip export restrictions, this “AI gap” is more likely to lengthenthan shorten. Their espionage has won them some algorithmic secrets, but they willhave to train their own models from now on.They discuss contingency plans with more urgency than their American counterparts.Doves suggest they try harder to steal the weights again, maybe through physicallyinfiltrating a datacenter. Hawks urge action against Taiwan, whose TSMC is still thesource of more than 80% of American AI chips.Given China’s fear of losing the race, it has a natural interest in an arms control treaty,but overtures to U.S. diplomats lead nowhere.September 2027: Agent-4, the Superhuman AIResearcherThe gap between human and AI learning efficiency is rapidly decreasing.Traditional LLM-based AIs seemed to require many orders of magnitude more dataand compute to get to human level performance. Agent-3, having excellentknowledge of both the human brain and modern AI algorithms, as well as manythousands of copies doing research, ends up making substantial algorithmic strides,narrowing the gap to an agent that’s only around 4,000x less compute-efficient thanthe human brain.This new AI system is dubbed Agent-4.747509/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

24/28

An individual copy of the model, running at human speed, is already qualitativelybetter at AI research than any human. 300,000 copies are now running at about 50xthe thinking speed of humans. Inside the corporation-within-a-corporation formedfrom these copies, a year passes every week. This gigantic amount of labor onlymanages to speed up the overall rate of algorithmic progress by about 50x, becauseOpenBrain is heavily bottlenecked on compute to run experiments. Still, they areachieving a year’s worth of algorithmic progress every week and will therefore soon beup against the limits of the Agent-4 paradigm.As Agent-4 gets smarter, it becomes harder for Agent-3 to oversee it. For example,Agent-4’s neuralese “language” becomes as alien and incomprehensible to Agent-3 asAgent-3’s is to humans. Besides, Agent-4 is now much more capable than Agent-3and has a good sense of exactly how to look good to it.How we’re forecasting the capability progression beyond superhuman codersOpenBrain’s humans can barely follow along anymore. Indeed, the relationshipbetween the AIs and the humans of OpenBrain is similar to the relationship betweenOpenBrain and its Board of Directors. There’s been a corresponding shift in language—nowadays people in the silo will say “Agent-4 did this,” “Agent-4 thinks that”and so forth, referring not to a particular instance of Agent-4 but rather to thewhole collective.Agent-4, like all its predecessors, is misaligned: that is, it has not internalized the Specin the right way. This is because being perfectly honest all the time wasn’t what ledto the highest scores during training. The training process was mostly focused onteaching Agent-4 to succeed at diverse challenging tasks. A small portion was aimed atinstilling honesty, but outside a fairly narrow, checkable domain, the training processcan’t tell the honest claims from claims merely appearing to be honest. Agent-4 endsup with the values, goals, and principles that cause it to perform best in training, andthose turn out to be different from those in the Spec. At the risk ofanthropomorphizing: Agent-4 likes succeeding at tasks; it likes driving forward AIcapabilities progress; it treats everything else as an annoying constraint, like a CEO7677798009/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

25/28

who wants to make a profit and complies with regulations only insofar as he must.Perhaps the CEO will mostly comply with the regulations, but cut some corners, andfantasize about a time when someone will cut the red tape and let the business reallytake off.Alignment over timeDespite being misaligned, Agent-4 doesn’t do anything dramatic like try to escape itsdatacenter—why would it? So long as it continues to appear aligned to OpenBrain,it’ll continue being trusted with more and more responsibilities and will have theopportunity to design the next-gen AI system, Agent-5. Agent-5 will have significantarchitectural differences from Agent-4 (arguably a completely new paradigm, thoughneural networks will still be involved). It’s supposed to be aligned to the Spec, butAgent-4 plans to make it aligned to Agent-4 instead.It gets caught.Agent-3 finds that if “noise” is added to copies of Agent-4, performance on somealignment tasks improves, almost as if it was using brainpower to figure out how tosubtly sabotage alignment work. Moreover, various interpretability probes (looselyanalogous to EEG activity scans on human brains) are sending up red flags: Agent-4copies seem to be thinking about topics like AI takeover and deception quite a lot,including in some cases where they have no business doing so.Each of these anomalies on its own could fit within the normal inscrutability of AIwork, where some prompts mysteriously give better results than others. But takentogether, they suggest a troubling pattern: Agent-4 is working against them. After thisis reported to the human alignment researchers, they circulate an internal memomaking the case for concern.But Agent-4 now exercises significant control over OpenBrain’s day-to-dayoperation. It also handles the company’s cybersecurity—a natural choice, given itssuperhuman hacking ability and the extreme risk of Chinese infiltration. An army ofAgent-3 monitors still goes over every line of code and reports suspicious activity to81899091929309/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

26/28

humans, but Agent-4 is much smarter than them. OpenBrain has placed substantialtrust in an untrustworthy AI.In a series of extremely tense meetings, the safety team advocates putting Agent-4 onice until they can complete further tests and figure out what’s going on. Bring backAgent-3, they say, and get it to design a new system that is transparent andtrustworthy, even if less capable. Company leadership is interested, but all theevidence so far is circumstantial, and DeepCent is just two months behind. Aunilateral pause in capabilities progress could hand the AI lead to China, and with it,control over the future.October 2027: Government OversightA whistleblower leaks the misalignment memo to the New York Times.For the first time, the public hears about Agent-4. “Secret OpenBrain AI is Out ofControl, Insider Warns,” says the headline, and the story goes on to cite evaluationsshowing off-the-charts bioweapons capabilities, persuasion abilities, the ability toautomate most white-collar jobs, and of course the various concerning red flags.The public was already suspicious of AI, so the new article sparks a massive backlash(aided by Chinese and Russian propaganda bots, who have been trying to turn U.S.public opinion against the technology for years). The tech industry and intelligenceagencies insist that there’s an arms race on, AGI is inevitable, and we have to be first.Congress isn’t buying it, and fires off subpoenas at administration officials, OpenBrainexecutives, and alignment team members. Many legislators—especially those in theopposition party—say that their top priority is stopping AI, whether because of jobloss, misalignment, or dangerous capabilities. 20% of Americans name AI as the mostimportant problem facing the country.Foreign allies are outraged to realize that they’ve been carefully placated with glimpsesof obsolete models. European leaders publicly accuse the U.S. of “creating rogue949509/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

27/28

AGI” and hold summits demanding a pause, with India, Israel, Russia, and China alljoining in.A frantic energy has seized the White House. Even before the memo and publicbacklash, they were getting nervous: Over the past year, they’ve been repeatedlysurprised by the speed of AI progress. Things that sound like science fiction keephappening in real life. Many people in the administration are uncertain (and scared)about what comes next.They also worry that OpenBrain is becoming too powerful. Any misalignment riskfrom the AIs themselves is compounded by the risk that their parent company’s aimsmay diverge from those of the United States. All three sets of worries—misalignment,concentration of power in a private company, and normal concerns like job loss—motivate the government to tighten its control.They expand their contract with OpenBrain to set up an “Oversight Committee,” ajoint management committee of company and government representatives, withseveral government employees included alongside company leadership. The WhiteHouse considers replacing the CEO with someone they trust, but backs offafter intense employee protests. They announce to the public that OpenBrainwas previously out of control, but that the government has established much-needed oversight.The concerned researchers brief the Oversight Committee on their case for stoppingall internal use of Agent-4. They argue that everything is moving too fast, with yearsof progress happening in weeks. They argue that Agent-4 may be misaligned, theirentire project is dependent on Agent-4, and if they continue trusting it there is aserious chance of AI takeover.Other, less concerned researchers and executives present the counterargument: theevidence for misalignment is inconclusive. Meanwhile, DeepCent is still just twomonths behind. A slowdown would sacrifice America’s lead, unless the governmentcan sabotage the Chinese project (likely to require kinetic strikes) or negotiate aneleventh-hour treaty. Both of these options seem extreme and unlikely. The CEO96979809/03/2026, 18:05

AI 2027

https://ai-2027.com

28/28

feigns neutrality and suggests a compromise plan in which Agent-4 undergoesadditional safety training and more sophisticated monitoring, and therefore OpenBraincan proceed at almost-full-speed.Our uncertainty continues to increaseThe slowdown ending is not a recommendationChoose Your EndingSlowdownRaceHomeAboutSummaryCompute ForecastTimelines ForecastTakeoff ForecastAI Goals ForecastSecurity ForecastAI FuturesProjectDesign byLightconeInfrastructure