---
source: Myrmikan 2025 02 11.pdf
path: Readings/Doomsberg & Myrmikan/Myrmikan 2025 02 11.pdf
date: 2025-02-11
status: unprocessed
---

Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

Page 1

Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

Daniel Oliver
Myrmikan Capital, LLC
doliver@myrmikan.com
(646) 797-3134

Gold Revaluation

“Money is gold and nothing else,” observed J.P. Morgan in 1912, meaning nothing 

else is money. Everything else is credit.

The  principles  of  liquidity  deduced  by  Carl  Menger  mandate  that  money  be  the 
most liquid commodity, that is, the one with the least amount of transaction costs both 
in time and through time.1 Money thus began as grain and cattle, then as copper, then 
silver, then gold. And there it ends. There is no element that has greater liquidity.

  The  story  of  liquidity  does  not  end  with  gold,  however.  Fully  reserved  bank  notes 
improve liquidity further by eliminating the need to weigh gold for quantity and assay it 
for quality, as long as the market has trust in the issuing institution—this is why every great 
banking system begins with banknotes fully redeemable into gold.

Myrmikan has discussed at length in previous letters the inevitable corruption of 
banking: after its proper function of liquefying gold and monetizing commercial bills, 
activities  that  the  free  market  supports,  legal  tender  laws  arrive  and  allow  banks  to 
monetize assets, then debt, then debt of ever greater quantity and ever worse quality.

Assets on The Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet

Gold

Treasury Bonds

Mortgage Backed Securities

Commercial Bills

Treasury bonds >10 years maturity

100%

50%

0%

1914

1944

1974

2004

1 

Spatial  liquidity,  costs  in  time,  is  determined  by  the  elements  of  recognizability,  uniformity, 
divisibility,  distribution,  scarcity,  and  settlement  costs;  temporal  liquidity,  costs  through  time,  refers  to  the 
expense of holding a commodity over time, including rate of decay, storage costs, long-term stability, and short-
term volatility.

NOTE: This material is for discussion purposes only. This is not an offer to buy or sell or subscribe or invest in se-curities. The information contained herein has been prepared for informational purposes using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and we cannot guarantee the accurateness of the information.Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

Page 2

In 1958, economist Melchior Palyi, advisor to the post-hyperinflation Reichsbank, 
warned Americans not to follow the Weimar Germany path: “When the national credit 
and  the  national  currency  are  ‘tapped’  in  order  to  maintain  ‘full  employment,’  full 
employment might be maintained. The money market can be kept liquid indefinitely 
if the Treasury prints certificates and the Federal Reserve monetizes them. But what 
happens to the liquidity of the monetizer?”

A  healthy  institution—be  it  a  company,  a  bank,  or  a  central  bank—can  intervene 
in the market to support the price of its liabilities. If its liabilities fall in price below 
fair value, the entity can sell liquid assets to generate cash and then use that cash to 
purchase  and  retire  its  own  liabilities  at  a  discount,  thus  earning  a  profit  to  provide 
the public service of stable prices. Once an entity is illiquid, however, there is nothing 
it can sell to support the price of its liabilities; sudden sales of illiquid assets result in 
steeply discounted prices, by definition. The situation is worse if the assets are also of 
uncertain value.

This is where the Federal Reserve finds itself: stuffed with assets of uncertain value 
and  uncertain  liquidity.  Treasury  bonds  and  mortgage-backed-securities  are  liquid 
now, but only because the market knows that the Fed stands as the buyer of last resort. 
What would happen to the liquidity of those markets if the Fed became the seller of first 
resort? The question answers itself. The Fed cannot sell its assets to support the dollar 
against sustained market selling. The government may do so through capital controls 
(and it will implement them, first soft, then hard), but the currency is then stabilized at 
the expense of collapsing trade and living standards, either through domestic inflation 
or shortages.

The Federal Reserve’s position is untenable because over time markets are more 
powerful than politicians and bureaucrats, and markets force balance sheets to balance, 
as is illustrated by the chart below. The black line shows the Fed’s gold position as a 
percentage of its liabilities at the official government price, which was $20.67/oz from 
1913 to 1934, then $35/oz, until it was repegged at $38/oz under the 1971 Smithsonian 
Agreement, and finally set to the current, official price of $42.22 in 1973. The market is 
not fooled by official prices, of course: the red line shows the Fed’s gold position using 
market prices.

GOLD AS A PERCENTAGE OF FEDERAL RESERVE ASSETS

Market Price

Official Price

Fed Funds rate at 20% 
GOLD: $650/oz

100%

50%

Fed Funds rate at 0.1% 
GOLD: $1,820/oz

Fed Funds Rate at 4% 
GOLD: $35/oz

1914

1944

1974

2004

0%

NOTE: This material is for discussion purposes only. This is not an offer to buy or sell or subscribe or invest in se-curities. The information contained herein has been prepared for informational purposes using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and we cannot guarantee the accurateness of the information.Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

Page 3

Note that when interest rates are low and falling, the Fed’s bond portfolio is richly 
priced,  meaning  the  market  prices  the  Fed’s  gold  position  at  a  low  price,  as  in  1968. 
Conversely, when rates are high and rising, and the value of the Fed’s bond portfolio is 
crashing, gold must soar in price in order to keep the Fed’s balance sheet balanced, as in 
1980. Interest rates fell from 1980 until three years ago, and the chart shows that gold, 
as a percentage of the Fed’s balance sheet, fell until the COVID credit blitz in 2021. The 
reading at the end of 2021 was gold at 5.5% of the Fed’s assets, less than half of the 1969 
bottom of 12.2%.  This makes sense: the bubble by the 2020s was far larger than that of 
the 1960s.

Rates have been rising since 2022, and (consistent with Myrmikan’s thesis) gold 
as a percentage of the Fed’s balance sheet has also been rising. Note that the nominal 
increases  have  been  somewhat  muted  because  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  has  also  been 
shrinking. Nevertheless, at a current value of 11% of the Fed’s balance sheet, even at 
record nominal prices gold is still cheaper than it was in 1969, at the beginning of that 
epic bull market.

Myrmikan’s theory is based on sound market principles, and the historical data fits 
the theory well. But there is a problem. The analysis is the best case because it assumes 
that the Fed actually owns the 8,133 tons of gold on its balance sheet. And that is almost 
but not quite true.

Congress  chartered  the  Fed  in  1913  to  issue  a  flexible  national  currency.  The 
previous regime had allowed nationally chartered banks to issue Treasury notes, which 
were  required  to  be  backed  by  a  like  quantity  of  Treasury  bonds.  The  supply  of  U.S. 
currency, therefore, reflected the size of federal debt. As critic Paul Warburg pointed 
out: “If the Panama Canal costs $500,000,000 we shall have $500,000,000 additional 
currency,  whether  the  nation  needs  it  or  not.  But  what  sane  reason  can  be  found  to 
make the currency of the nation dependent on whether or not we build a canal?”

Warburg was the chief architect of the Federal Reserve, and he designed it to issue 
money in accordance to the needs of business, not the desires of government. But, as a 
brake, to make sure that the Fed did not overissue, it was required to hold 40% worth 
of gold against the currency it issued and 35% against banks’ required reserves held at 
the Fed.

In 1929, the largest theretofore credit bubble in history popped, and in 1934, Franklin 
Roosevelt  signed  a  decree  making  the  possession  of  gold  a  felony.  Americans  were 
required to hand in their gold bullion or face a “$10,000 fine or 10 years imprisonment, or 
both.” The Federal Reserve was similarly required to hand over its gold to the Treasury, 
but, unlike the citizens, who received $20.67 per ounce in Federal Reserve notes, the 
Federal Reserve itself was issued gold certificates equal to the amount of gold seized. 
When  Roosevelt  revalued  gold  to  $35/oz,  the  citizens  were  cheated,  but  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  gold  certificates  were  revalued  higher.  Since  the  Federal  Reserve’s  money-
creation capacity was legally constrained by the gold coverage legislation, revaluing the 
gold certificates meant the Fed could issue more money and credit.

This  loosening  of  constraints  on  the  Fed  had  no  immediate  effect.  The  ongoing 
depression  meant  there  was  little  demand  for  credit,  and  political  and  economic 
turmoil in Europe sent gold into the U.S. for safety. The Fed’s gold coverage was 61% in 
1934 and reached 85% by 1940.

It  was  not  to  last.  Enormous  war  spending  doubled  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  over 
five years even as the Fed’s reported gold holdings fell by 10%. As a result, by 1945, the 

NOTE: This material is for discussion purposes only. This is not an offer to buy or sell or subscribe or invest in se-curities. The information contained herein has been prepared for informational purposes using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and we cannot guarantee the accurateness of the information.Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

Page 4

Fed’s gold coverage had fallen to only 40%, the statutory requirement for currency. So, 
Congress passed legislation reducing the coverage requirement to 25% for both money 
and member bank reserves. So much for Warburg’s gold constraint.

The  government  grew  modestly  under  Eisenhower,  but  then  Keynes’s  disciples 
grabbed control under Kennedy. Their policies were based on a study by A.W.H. Phillips 
that showed that from 1861 to 1957, inflation and employment had been correlated. This 
was a period that had operated under gold standards of various guises, and so it should 
have been no surprise that inflation caused by credit bubbles resulted in high levels of 
employment, whereas the deflationary crashes resulted in soaring unemployment. 

But the Keynesians mistook the Phillips curve as a policy lever—as if there were 
a  permanent,  stable  relationship  between  unemployment  and  increases  in  prices, 
irrespective  of  whether  those  increases  were  driven  by  credit  inflation  or  monetary 
debasement. According to the new economists, politicians had no choice but to select 
where along the Phillips curve society should travel by modifying the amount of deficit 
spending.

Kennedy  and  Johnson  were  delighted  to  discover  that  the  best  way  to  aid  the 
working man was through deficits: spending soared by 65 percent under their watch, 
and  more  than  half  of  the  resulting  deficit  was  monetized  by  the  Federal  Reserve. 
Proliferating  Treasury  securities  acted  as  reserves  in  the  banking  system  to  allow 
money and credit to increase at a ferocious pace, while increasingly nervous foreign 
central banks accelerated their redemptions of dollars into gold.

By March 1965, the Fed’s gold cover had fallen to 25.0084%, just above the statutory 
limit. Congress decided it could not accept the gold brake that Warburg had included in 
his design, so it voted to abolish the gold coverage requirement against member bank 
reserves, allowing all of the remaining gold to back just the currency. According to a 
1968 Federal Reserve commentary, “The 1965 Act freed over $4 billion of gold [from 
acting as reserves] and the free gold supply accordingly jumped up to nearly $6 billion.”1

The gold lasted only three more years: foreign redemptions and Johnson’s excessive 
spending  sent  the  remaining  gold  cover  below  25%  even  for  just  federal  reserve 
notes. On March 19, 1968, Johnson signed a bill abolishing any kind of gold coverage 
requirements. Fed chairman William McChesney Martin hailed the move because it 
“would  make  absolutely  clear  that  the  United  States’  gold  stock  is  fully  available  to 
serve its primary purpose as an international reserve,” domestic savers been damned. 
Foreign  central  banks  availed  themselves  of  that  availability  until  August  15,  1971, 
when Nixon announced to the world: “I have directed Secretary Connally to suspend, 
temporarily, the convertibility of the dollar into gold or other reserve assets.”

Nixon  may  have  actually  believed  that  the  suspension  of  convertibility  was 
temporary (there had been many such banking system suspensions in U.S. history, all 
of which had been temporary). Attempting to revive the Bretton Woods system, the U.S. 
revalued its gold first to $38/oz in 1972 and then $42.22/oz in 1973.

According  to  a  1974  Federal  Reserve  commentary,  the  practical  effect  of  the 
revaluation was this: 1) the value of the Treasury’s gold increased by $800 million in 
nominal terms, 2) the Treasury issued to the Fed an additional $800 million worth of 
gold certificates and received in exchange an increase in the Treasury’s deposit account 
at  the  Fed  by  a  like  amount,  3)  the  Treasury  then  spent  that  $800  million  into  the 
economy, which 4) thereby increased the monetary base by $800 million.

1 

Ramage,  Joseph  P.  “The  Gold  Cover.”  Economic  Quarterly  (Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Richmond). 

Monthly Review, July 1968. 

NOTE: This material is for discussion purposes only. This is not an offer to buy or sell or subscribe or invest in se-curities. The information contained herein has been prepared for informational purposes using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and we cannot guarantee the accurateness of the information.Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

Page 5

The article observed: 

The  Treasury  was  able  to  pay  for  $800  million  of  goods  and  services 
without  using  tax  revenues  or  putting  additional  upward  pressures  on 
market  interest  rates  by  increasing  the  stock  of  Government  securities 
held  by  the  public.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  Government 
sector was able to acquire goods without any effects on the real disposable 
income of consumers. Since the effect on the monetary base was not offset 
by Federal Reserve actions, there was a resulting expansion of the money 
stock, an expansion of total demand, and ultimately upward pressures on 
prices.... The Treasury now had an alternative means, in addition to using 
tax revenues or the proceeds from the sale of Government securities, to 
finance its planned expenditures.1

Note  that  the  1968  Fed  commentary  quoted  above  interpreted  a  relaxation  or 
abolishment of the gold coverage requirement as allowing the private banking system to 
increase money and credit, whereas the 1974 commentary explained that the increase 
in the official price of gold allows the Treasury to create money ex nihilo to drive the 
monetary base and inflation higher.

This  relationship  between  the  Fed  and  the  nation’s  gold  is  uncharacteristic  of 
normal central banking practice. In Europe, for example, central banks own their gold 
directly  and  have  threatened  to  revalue  it  to  recoup  losses  suffered  from  following 
Bernanke’s  and  Powell’s  policies  of  bailing  out  insolvent  banks.  In  March  2023, 
Joachim Wuermeling, a member of the executive board of the Bundesbank, stated in a 
press conference:

The most important revaluation item of course is the reserve for the 3,355 
tonnes of gold. In fact, the value is about €180 billion euros above the cost 
of purchasing it, so this is a reserve for us, and it’s part of the considerable 
own-funds  of  Bundesbank,  underlining  the  soundness  which  the 
President mentioned. So, in fact, it’s on firm ground—the balance sheet 
of Deutsche Bundesbank—and this certainly makes it easier for us to bare 
losses over a certain period of time.2

Calling the Bundesbank’s balance sheet sound because gold has risen in nominal 
price  clearly  indicates  that  Joachim  does  not  understand  that  the  more  the  central 
banks print, the more their currencies fall, and the higher the gold price goes to keep 
the central bank’s balance sheet always in balance—he and other central bankers seem 
to imagine that the gold price increase is unrelated to monetary policy, manna from 
heaven, that just happens, fortuitously, to plug the holes in their balance sheets. But 
note that the result is exactly that which Myrmikan’s thesis predicts.

The U.S. analysis is more complicated because its central bank does not own the 
gold. Powell recently confirmed this in a letter to Congress dated February 23, 2024: 
“The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (FRBNY)  provides  gold  custody  on  behalf 
of certain official-sector account holders, which include the U.S. government, foreign 
governments, other central banks, and official international organizations. The FRBNY 
does  not  own  any  of  the  gold  it  holds  as  custodian,  and  no  other  part  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System owns gold. . . .”3

1 

Burger,  Albert  E.  “The  Monetary  Economics  of  Gold.”  Jan  1974.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis 

Monthly Review, Vol. 56, No. 1.

2 

https://www.bundesbank.de/de/service/mediathek/press-conference-presenting-the-annual-

report-2022-904562 @ 26:00.

3 

https://www.moneymetals.com/uploads/content/Chair-Powell-to-Rep.-Mooney-2.23.24.pdf

NOTE: This material is for discussion purposes only. This is not an offer to buy or sell or subscribe or invest in se-curities. The information contained herein has been prepared for informational purposes using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and we cannot guarantee the accurateness of the information.Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

Page 6

Powell is not quite right for two reasons. First, the Treasury publishes the quantity 
of  the  8,133  tons  of  gold  that  each  of  its  eight  depositories  holds  and  also  lists  the 
nominal value of $11,041 million (valued at $42.22/oz).1 According to the Treasury, the 
Fed custodies only 5% of the Treasury’s physical gold, but the Fed lists the full nominal 
value  on  its  balance  sheet  as  an  asset,  which  means  that  all  of  the  Treasury’s  gold  is 
encumbered  by  the  Fed.  Indeed,  the  1974  Fed  commentator  wrote:  “Meanwhile,  the 
increased value of the gold stock became a 100 percent backing for the gold certificates 
which the Treasury issued to the Federal Reserve.” Presumably the “backing” means 
that the Fed has some derivative claim on the gold, though perhaps only in the nominal 
amount of $11 billion.

The  second  point  is  more  nuanced  and  is  answered  by  the  question:  does  the 
market care that the Fed’s and the Treasury’s balance sheets are legally distinct? In the 
1960s, the Treasury conspired with seven European countries to smash the gold price 
whenever it peaked above the official price of $35/oz, essentially using the Treasury’s 
gold to protect the value of the Federal Reserve note, colloquially known as “the dollar.” 
The Treasury did the same thing unilaterally in the 1970s (the Assistant Secretary of 
State  for  Economic  Affairs  told  Henry  Kissinger  and  Ken  Rush  in  1974:  “I  think  we 
should  look  very  hard  then,  Ken,  at  very  substantial  sales  of  gold—U.S.  gold  on  the 
market—to raid the gold market once and for all”).

Treasury bonds are the global reserve asset, they give the U.S. an enormous subsidy, 
they are the foundation of the American empire, and they mature into Federal Reserve 
notes. The government will not willingly allow the Fed to collapse: in attacking the Fed, 
the market must consider the Treasury’s gold, whatever the legal distinction between 
the Treasury’s and the Fed’s balance sheets.

Just because the Treasury will instinctively defend the Fed does not mean it will 
not eventually surrender to the market, however. Indeed, if defending the Fed allows 
Congress to continue its profligate spending, then (like the Gold Pool and the 1970s) 
the Treasury’s efforts will unleash the financial forces that will overwhelm it. This is 
when the legal distinction between Fed and Treasury and owning gold versus owning a 
claim on gold will manifest. The U.S. has already allowed two previous central banks to 
dissolve; why not shutter a third if supporting it becomes too costly to maintain?

And what a wonderfully populist move it would be to allow the Fed to fail: the U.S. 
could  issue  currency  directly  in  the  form  of  gold-backed  Treasury  notes  and  allow 
the  Federal  Reserve  note  to  disappear.  The  indebted  will  be  relieved,  obligations  to 
foreigners  will  be  wiped  out,  wealth  will  be  redistributed  toward  the  productive  and 
away from legacy holders of claims on assets, and the debt system that enriched the few 
will disintegrate, a modern jubilee. This is more or less what an uncontrolled unwind 
of the dollar system would look like. Perhaps not a terrible outcome for a populist like 
Trump, though it would come with much risk and collateral damage, such as the end of 
the U.S. empire and exorbitant privileges.

Current market chatter is that the Trump administration may attempt a controlled 
devaluation  instead.  The  specific  policies  to  accomplish  this  are  presented  in  a 
November 2024 paper written by Stephen Miran, whom Trump has nominated to be 
the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers: “A User’s Guide to Restructuring 
the Global Trading System.”2

1 
owned-gold
2 

https://fiscaldata.treasury.gov/datasets/status-report-government-gold-reserve/u-s-treasury-

https://www.hudsonbaycapital.com/documents/FG/hudsonbay/research/638199_A_Users_Guide_

to_Restructuring_the_Global_Trading_System.pdf

NOTE: This material is for discussion purposes only. This is not an offer to buy or sell or subscribe or invest in se-curities. The information contained herein has been prepared for informational purposes using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and we cannot guarantee the accurateness of the information.Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

Page 7

Miran embraces the “Triffin dilemma” in which “the reserve asset producer must 
run  persistent  current  account  deficits  as  the  flip  side  of  exporting  reserve  assets. . . . 
As  the  rest  of  the  world  grows,  the  consequences  for  our  own  export  sectors—an 
overvalued dollar incentivizing imports—become more difficult to bear, and the pain 
inflicted on that portion of the economy increases. . . . Eventually (in theory), a Triffin 
‘tipping point’ is reached at which such deficits grow large enough to induce credit risk 
in the reserve asset. The reserve country may lose reserve status, ushering in a wave of 
global instability.” 

In order to rebalance trade, Miran first cites studies suggesting that tariffs up to 20% 
creates net income for the imposing country: either the foreign currency falls, in which 
case  domestic  prices  are  stable  and  consumers  do  not  change  their  behavior,  but  the 
Treasury gets the tariff income, or the foreign currency does not adjust, in which case 
there  is  inflation  for  imported  goods  but  also  an  incentive  to  reshore  manufacturing. 
The benefits disappear if the other county retaliates, but Miran points out that existing, 
enormous U.S. trade deficits mean other countries have much more to lose in a trade war.

If  the  dollar  is  already  too  strong  and  tariffs  threaten  to  raise  the  dollar’s  value 
further,  then  Trump  must  also  weaken  the  dollar  but  in  a  way  that  does  not  raise 
interest rates or increase financial instability. Miran has several suggestions:

One way of doing this is to impose a user fee on foreign official holders 
of  Treasury  securities,  for  instance  withholding  a  portion  of  interest 
payments  on  those  holdings.  Reserve  holders  impose  a  burden  on  the 
American export sector, and withholding a portion of interest payments 
can  help  recoup  some  of  that  cost.  Some  bondholders  may  accuse  the 
United  States  of  defaulting  on  its  debt,  but  the  reality  is  that  most 
governments  tax  interest  income,  and  the  U.S.  already  taxes  domestic 
holders  of  UST  securities  on  their  interest  payments.  While  this  policy 
works  through  currencies  as  a  means  of  affecting  economic  conditions, 
it  is  actually  a  policy  targeting  reserve  accumulation  and  not  a  formal 
currency  policy. . . .    As  in  tariffs,  [Trump  should]  differentiate  among 
countries.  Presumably  the  Administration  would  want  to  withhold 
remittances to geopolitical adversaries like China more severely than to 
allies, or to countries that engage in currency manipulation more severely 
than to those that do not. The Administration would likely want to give 
our allies the benefits of reserve currency usage, not our adversaries.

He also cites the writings of Fed guru Zoltan Poszar, whose policy expectations rest 

on the following three assumptions:

1) security zones are a public good, and countries on the inside must fund 
it by buying Treasurys;

2)  security  zones  are  a  capital  good;  they  are  best  funded  by  century 
bonds, not short-term bills;

3) security zones have barbed wires: unless you swap your bills for bonds, 
tariffs will keep you out.

Miran  thus  suggests:  “An  agreement  whereby  our  trading  partners  term  out 
their reserve holdings into ultralong duration UST securities will a) alleviate funding 
pressure  on  the  Treasury  and  reduce  the  amount  of  duration  Treasury  needs  to  sell 
into  the  market;  b)  improve  debt  sustainability  by  reducing  the  amount  of  debt  that 
will need to be rolled over at higher rates as the budget deteriorates over time; and c) 
solidify  that  our  provision  of  a  defense  umbrella  and  reserve  assets  are  intertwined. 

NOTE: This material is for discussion purposes only. This is not an offer to buy or sell or subscribe or invest in se-curities. The information contained herein has been prepared for informational purposes using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and we cannot guarantee the accurateness of the information.Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

There may even be arguments for selling perpetuals rather than century bonds, in this 
eventuality.”

Page 8

Why would U.S. allies agree to this? “First, there is the stick of tariffs. Second, there 
is the carrot of the defense umbrella and the risk of losing it. Third, there are ample 
central bank tools available to help provide liquidity in the face of higher interest rate 
risk. . . .  This  mark-to-market  risk  of  holding  longer-term  debt  can  be  mitigated  via 
swap  lines  with  the  Federal  Reserve,  or  alternatively,  with  the  Treasury’s  Exchange 
Stabilization Fund. Either institution can lend dollars to reserve holders at par against 
their  long-term  Treasury  debt  holdings,  as  a  perk  of  being  inside  the  Mar-a-Lago 
Accord,” as was done to save the banking system following the collapse of Silicon Valley 
Bank. In other words, the Fed would simply print any losses due to interest rate risk.

All  of  this  makes  geopolitical  sense.  The  post-World  War  II  institutions  are  not 
apples with a few worms inside but simply “balls of worms,” to use Elon Musk’s colorful 
metaphor. Trump understands that the international order is dead, that the world is 
returning to spheres of influence. This is why he will likely cede Ukraine to Russia even 
as he seizes Greenland and Panama; it makes sense under this worldview to demarcate 
friend, neutral, and enemy in the financial markets.

For his part, Trump’s newly minted Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent gave a speech 
last June outlining his vision when angling for the job: “We’re also at a unique moment 
geopolitically, and I could see in the next few years that we are going to have to have 
some kind of a grand global economic reordering, something on the equivalent of a new 
Bretton Woods or if you want to go back like something back to the Steel Agreements 
[which  led  to  the  European  Common  Market  and  then  the  European  Union]  or  the 
Treaty of Versailles, there’s a very good chance that we are going to have to have that 
over the next four years, and I’d like to be a part of it.”1

One  topic  that  Bessent  and  Miran  have  avoided  discussing  is  gold  revaluation. 
Recall that the Federal Reserve’s 1974 commentary described how a revaluation grants 
the  Treasury  spending  power  ex  nihilo,  without  increasing  taxes  or  putting  upwards 
pressure on interest rates but at the cost of a weaker dollar—in other words, it achieves 
all  three  of  Trump’s  objectives.  The  problem  is  that  Congress,  not  Bessent,  sets  the 
official price.

Miran did have this to say about gold:

The Gold Reserve Act also authorizes the Secretary to sell gold in a way 
“the  Secretary  considers  most  advantageous  to  the  public  interest,” 
providing  additional  potential  funds  for  building  foreign  exchange 
reserves.  However,  the  Secretary  is  statutorily  required  to  use  the 
proceeds from such sales “for the sole purpose of reducing the national 
debt.”  This  requirement  can  be  reconciled  with  the  goal  of  building 
foreign exchange reserves by having the ESF sell dollars forward. If gold 
sales are used to deliver dollars into the forward contracts, it will likely 
satisfy the statutory requirement of reducing national debt.

Miran  has  the  Treasury  selling  gold  to  buy  non-U.S.  sovereign  debt  as  a  way  to 
weaken  the  dollar,  but  the  sale  proceeds  could  be  used  to  fund  anything,  including 
investments to subsidize rebuilding U.S. manufacturing. Note as well that his suggested 
mechanism neuters the Congressional power to set the official price of gold as well as 

1 

Bessent, Scott. “The Fallacy of Bidenomics: A Return to Central Planning.” 6 Jun 2024. Toward a New 
Supply-Side: The Future of Free Enterprise in the United States. Manhattan Institute. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=drPH94fio7E @ 5:04.

NOTE: This material is for discussion purposes only. This is not an offer to buy or sell or subscribe or invest in se-curities. The information contained herein has been prepared for informational purposes using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and we cannot guarantee the accurateness of the information.Myrmikan Research
February 11, 2025

functionally avoids the the debt-repayment restriction of the Gold Reserve Act, though 
it would require the debt ceiling to be raised.

Page 9

Adding to speculation that the U.S. executive branch might mobilize the nation’s 
gold reserve, Bessent offered these cryptic remarks from the Oval Office on February 3: 
“Within the next twelve months, we’re going to monetize the asset side of the U.S. balance 
sheet for the American people. We’re going to put the assets to work. . . . It’s going to be 
a combination of liquid assets, assets that we have in this country,  as we work to bring 
them out to the American people.”

It is not clear what exactly Bessent meant, but on February 6, the Financial Times 
published  an  article  titled:  “Gold  glitters  as  the  unimaginable  becomes  imaginable”: 
“Some  hedge  fund  contemporaries  of  Scott  Bessent,  the  hedgie-turned-US  Treasury 
secretary, are speculating about a revaluation of America’s gold stocks. . . . Knowledgeable 
observers reckon that if these were marked at current values—$2,800 an ounce—this 
could inject $800bn into the Treasury General Account, via a repurchase agreement.”

The point of this commentary is not that we agree or disagree with Miran’s economic 
theories or that we are predicting the Bessent will execute a sudden gold revaluation. 
Indeed, Miran himself recommended an extended timeline: 

1) There is good reason to be more cautious with changes to dollar policy 
than with changes to tariffs.

2)  Steps  to  strengthen  undervalued  currencies  will  likely  not  be  taken 
until  risks  can  be  mitigated.  The  Administration  will  likely  wait  for 
more confidence that inflation and deficits are lower, to limit potentially 
harmful increases in long yields that could accompany a change to dollar 
policy.  Waiting  for  turnover  at  the  Federal  Reserve  [Powell’s  term  as 
chairman  ends  May  15,  2026]  increases  the  likelihood  that  the  Fed  will 
voluntarily cooperate to help accommodate changes in currency policy.

3) Tariffs are a tool for negotiating leverage as much as for revenue and 
fairness.  Tariffs  will  likely  precede  any  shift  to  soft  dollar  policy  that 
requires cooperation from trade partners for implementation, since the 
terms of any agreement will be more beneficial if the United States has 
more negotiating leverage.

Traders  seems  to  be  less  cautious,  with  bullion  prices  surging  in  response  to 
established  media  publications  like  the  Financial  Times  raising  the  prospect  of  gold 
revaluation as a follow up to its article on January 29 titled “Gold stockpiling in New 
York leads to London shortage,” a phenomenon that has become more intense since 
the article was published. It may, in fact, serve Trump’s interest to delay and leak hints 
about gold because the higher the gold price goes, the more money the Treasury will be 
able to create on a sale, swap, or revaluation.

Heretofore the only institution that mattered with regards to dollar strength was 
the Federal Reserve; Trump has shifted all attention to the Treasury Department. No 
one cares about Powell any more. There is increasing evidence that Bessent and Trump 
are going to remake the financial system and that gold is going to play a role. The BRICS 
are already moving in that direction.

In 2012, Bernanke lectured that there was not enough gold to balance international 
trade—he was wrong; of course there is, at the correct price, a number very much larger 
than $2,900 per ounce. 

NOTE: This material is for discussion purposes only. This is not an offer to buy or sell or subscribe or invest in se-curities. The information contained herein has been prepared for informational purposes using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and we cannot guarantee the accurateness of the information.The information transmitted is intended only for the person or entity to which it is addressed and may contain confidential and/or privileged material. Any review, retransmission, dissemination or other use of, or taking of any action in reliance upon, this information by persons or entities other than the intended recipient is prohibited. If you received this in error, please contact the sender and delete the material from your computer.The material contained herein is for discussion purposes only and is not an offer to buy or sell securities. It has been prepared using sources considered reliable and accurate, however, it is subject to change and the accurateness of the material cannot be guaranteed.