---
source: (14) 10 Most Interesting Things 6-20-25 - Must Read.pdf
path: Readings/Macro - FFTT/(14) 10 Most Interesting Things 6-20-25 - Must Read.pdf
date: 2025-06-20
status: unprocessed
---

J U N E   2 0 ,   2 0 2 5  

You can listen to this 
report at this link: 

Stream FFTT Tree Rings 
June 20, 2025 by FFTT, 
LLC | Listen online for free 
on SoundCloud 

Luke Gromen, CFA 
FFTT, LLC 
216.533.1622 
Luke@FFTT-LLC.com 
www.FFTT-LLC.com 
Follow us on X:  
@LukeGromen 

FFTT “Tree Rings”: The 10 Most Interesting Things 
We’ve Read Recently  

Here are this week’s “Tree Rings”.  Have a great weekend!  LG 

1.  “Central banks are beginning to fret about USD swap lines” (Page 

2) 

2.  “PBOC chief Pan sees currency competition as USD dominance 

falters” (Page 5) 

3.  “The US is exceptional – when it comes to rates” (Page 6) 

4.  “There is almost as much the-world-is-changing nonsense 

generated by the signing of the RCEP as there was by the creation 
in 2016 of the AIIB” (Page 9) 

5.  “Trade with China is becoming a one-way street” (Page 15) 

6.  “How the Federal Reserve fuels profligacy” (Page 17) 

7.  “…stablecoins could grow into a $3.7T market by 2030 [up 14x 

from today’s levels].” -Treasury Sec. Bessent (Page 19) 

8.  “Pres. Trump has secured a perpetual Golden Share as part of 

Nippon Steel’s acquisition of US Steel” (Page 22) 

9.  “Trump’s trade and tax policies start to stall US battery boom” 

(Page 25) 

10.  “Israel is running low on defensive interceptors, official says”  

(Page 26) 

 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Central banks are beginning to fret about USD swap lines” 

Central banks are beginning to fret about USD swap lines – 6/13/25 (via MP) 
Central banks are beginning to fret about dollar swap lines 

“There is debate about the Kindleberger trap,” one tells me, referring to the economist Charles Kindleberger’s 
warning that turbulence erupts when a dominant geopolitical power loses the ability or desire to support a reserve 
currency, without its ascendant rival stepping into the breach. (This is what happened in the interwar years before 
sterling was replaced by the dollar.)  

We are emphatically not at such a Kindleberger moment now — and we must hope it never comes. But the key point 
is this: unless the White House clearly supports Powell’s comments about the need to preserve dollar swap lines, 
unease will grow.  

So let us all trust that Bessent, as a financial history buff, recognizes this, and acts. If not the price of gold will keep 
on rising. 

Tree Ring: Some western investors believe this USD swap line vulnerability is something China has just begun thinking 
about, but that is wrong.  Paradoxically, China’s concern about a so-called “USD trap” began not with concerns about a 
strong USD or USD shortage in the last few years, but when the US printed money in the Great Financial Crisis, a move 
that would (and did) reduce the real value of Beijing’s UST holdings over time (higher inflation) and which was seen in 
Beijing as a financial attack on China’s economy:   

2  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
The PBOC released a white paper 
with the BIS in March 2009 
advocating for a shift to a neutral 
reserve asset:   

…and when the US and EU 
disconnected Iran from the SWIFT 
system in 2012, China’s urgency to 
find USD system workarounds rose 
meaningfully:   

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…as the risk of nearly overnight 
hyperinflation was (understandably) a 
completely unacceptable acute national 
security threat to China (and Russia and 
others.)  

The above sequence of events was 
followed in 2013 by the publication of the 
book “Treasury’s War” by former US 
Treasury official Juan Zarate, which said 
in essence “We have weaponized the 
USD system and we are going to keep 
doing so.”   

So where does this leave us today, and 
how does this relate to the initial article 
above about foreign uncertainty around 
USD swap line availability?   

Many western investors talking about 
swap lines and saying workarounds or 
changes to the USD system would take 
decades are “fighting the last war”: 
China, Russia, et al have already been 
working on USD workarounds and 
systemic changes for nearly two 
decades.   

To be clear, we are NOT saying changes would not be disruptive…we are just saying it would likely be disruptive 
for everyone, and likely result in gold being used as a workaround…which would likely require a WAY higher 
price of gold and is likely why the initial FT article above concluded by noting, “If not, the price of gold will keep 
on rising.”  Let’s watch. 

4  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“PBOC chief Pan sees currency competition as USD dominance falters” 

PBOC chief Pan sees currency competition as USD dominance falters – 6/18/25 
PBOC Chief Pan Sees Currency Competition as Dollar Dominance Falters - Bloomberg 

People’s Bank of China Governor Pan Gongsheng laid out in the clearest terms yet his vision for the future of a new 
global currency order after decades of dollar dominance, predicting a more competitive system will take root in the 
years to come. 

“In the future, the global monetary system could continue to evolve toward a situation where a few sovereign 
currencies co-exist, compete and check and balance each other,” Pan said Wednesday in a keynote speech at the 
annual Lujiazui Forum in Shanghai. 

Pan said there have been discussions around the world on how to reduce excessive reliance on a single currency, 
adding that the yuan’s global status has risen in recent years.  Speaking at the same event in Shanghai, Wang Xin, 
director of the research bureau under the PBOC, warned that while market confidence in the dollar has weakened, its 
future status will depend on how other currencies develop. 

“It would be an improvement if we go from a system that overly relies on the dollar to one where several major 
currencies compete with each other, which would impose both incentives and constraints on countries that issue 
those currencies,” he said. 

Tree Ring: If the daisy chain of Chinese 
comments and actions dating back to 
2009 in the prior point are not enough, 
this week the current head of the PBOC 
“laid out in the clearest terms yet his 
vision for the future of a new global 
currency order after decades of USD 
dominance, predicting a more 
competitive system will take root in the 
years to come.” 

What does that mean, in practical terms?  
In our view, it means multi-currency 
commodity and goods trading, with net 
gold settlement, with gold gaining share 
of global FX reserves over time.   

Critically, this is not an academic or 
hypothetical exercise; it is already well 
underway, and has been for years. 

The chart at right from a recent ECB 
report shows that if you include gold 
in global FX reserves, the USD’s share 
of global FX reserves is down to 46%, 
and in a clear downtrend, with “other currencies” the biggest winner since 2014. 

Bigger picture, it is not typically in Chinese policymaker nature to publicly communicate strategic goals unless 
they are already extremely confident of success (see the 2015 announcement of “Made in China 2025” initiative, 
for example), so in our view, China is confident the above is already “a done deal”.  Indeed, we can see many 
signs of it already in markets, which we will highlight in the following pages.  Let’s watch.   

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 5 

 
 
“The US is exceptional – when it comes to rates” 

The US is exceptional – when it comes to rates – 6/16/25 (via SG) 
The US Is Exceptional — When It Comes to Rates - Bloomberg 

Only Hong Kong, which attempts to keep its own dollar pegged to the greenback, has higher rates. Differentials with 
the rest of the world are rising. That would usually push the dollar upward — but in the weird conditions created by 
trade policy uncertainty, the currency has been falling (before a mild rally on the news of the Israeli attack on Iran). 

 The 180-degree turn in the 
dollar’s behavior is clearest if we 
compare the spread between fed 
funds and the European Central 
Bank’s target rate, which is 
widening, with the dollar-euro 
exchange rate (right).  

Tree Ring: One of the symptoms of “a more 
competitive currency system taking root” as 
called out by the head of the PBOC in the prior 
point would be historical currency and interest 
rate relationships breaking down. 

For example, the USD not strengthening 
relative to the EUR despite sharply higher USD 
interest rate differentials (right): 

Another example of a breakdown 
in historical currency and interest 
rate relationships can be seen at 
right, where a sharp decline in 
Chinese corporate profits would 
normally pull down both Chinese 
10y government bond yields 
(CGB’s) and 10y UST yields. 

This makes sense as declining 
corporate profits would historically 
portend a weaker CNY to bolster 
Chinese corporate margins, which 
would portend lower US inflation 
(via lower Chinese goods import 
costs), and therefore lower 10y 
UST yields… 

…but since mid-2022, declining 
Chinese corporate profits have 
driven 10y CGB yields down, 
but 10y UST yields have instead 
trended up: 

6  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
The above divergences are a corollary to a point we made in these pages three weeks ago noting that a stronger JPY is 
no longer driving lower 10y JGB yields (left), and a weaker USD is no longer driving lower 10y UST yields (right), 
suggesting that both the BOJ and Fed are increasingly cornered: If they hike rates, 10y yields rise; if they cut 
rates, 10y yields rise; this is a symptom of fiscal dominance, and as the world’s two biggest funding currencies, a 
potential looming crisis for the world possibly. 

Another example of a 
divergence between 
rates and currencies 
can be seen at right in 
the divergence 
between inverted 10y 
US real rates and gold. 

As we note at right, in 
2022, US spending 
cuts drove 10y yields 
up, stocks down, and 
GDP down, so gold 
began discounting 
the fiscal reality that 
US policymakers 
needed to either 
stand aside and allow 
a debt spiral to 
consume the US and 
the world, or provide 
the USD liquidity as 
needed to stop it. 

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
This is an important chart to keep in mind if/as “a more competitive currency system is taking root” as the head of the 
PBOC asserted: There are two key drivers to relative currency values; relative interest rates, and balance of 
payments…a multi-currency trade system with net gold settlement would push currencies to trade more on 
balance of payments…and on a balance of payments basis, the USD is the “dirtiest dirty shirt”: 

Current Account Balances by Country, 2023
Top 10 Surplus & Deficit Nations
Sources: CIA World Factbook, FFTT

$400

$200

$0

-$200

-$400

-$600

-$800

-$1,000

If system moves to neutral reserve asset, USD will 
be "dirtiest dirty shirt" because USD will fall most v. 
the neutral reserve asset, allowing USD to fall v. 
CNY as needed to "rebalance" trade, a goal 
expressed by Scott Bessent in October

If/as the global currency system was transitioning toward “a more competitive currency system taking root” 
based more on balance of payments fundamentals, we would expect to see the US Fed keep rates higher than 
they might otherwise seem to need to be, and the USD not responding to those relatively high rates, and gold 
diverging from inverted 10y US real rates, etc.…or exactly what has been happening. 

In our view, the easiest/cleanest way to play this over time (i.e., the best currencies to own) is to own gold and BTC; we 
continue to be on high alert regarding a potential crisis that could be triggered by the divergence between 10y USTs and 
DXY and 10y JGB’s and JPY. 

Let’s watch.   

8  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“There is almost as much the-world-is-changing nonsense generated by the signing of the RCEP as there was by 
the creation in 2016 of the AIIB” 

Tree Ring: Continuing on the theme of the 
symptoms of “a more competitive currency system 
taking root” showing up in markets and economic 
data, this Michael Pettis X thread from November 
2020 (right) caught our attention recently… 

(5) Michael Pettis on X: "1/11 There is almost as 
much excited the-world-is-changing nonsense 
generated by the signing of the RCEP as there was 
by the creation in 2016 of the AIIB, and because of 
many of the same confusions over the sources and 
consequences of global imbalances. 
https://t.co/hNrCQpj6pG" / X 

…because the best way to a) see the strategy 
China has been pursuing and b) judge whether it 
is working or is “nonsense” (as Pettis called it at 
the time it was announced)… 

…is to go back in time, read what experts like 
Pettis said at the time, and contrast that with what 
has actually transpired, paying particular attention 
to market reactions, because market 
reactions and price movements are 
simply information being conveyed.   

Our working hypothesis is that “More 
currency competition featuring more local 
currency trade and net trade settlement in 
gold.” 

If that is correct, given that we are now 
nearly five years into the process, we 
should be seeing “a more competitive 
currency system taking root” in a series 
of market outcomes and price reactions… 

…and that is exactly what we are seeing. 

For example… 

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
One market reaction we would expect to 
see is more trade for everyone involved in 
the “more competitive currency system 
taking root” …<check>: 

China exports to US plunged 34% 
y/y in May, sharpest drop since 
COVID; but total Chinese exports 
up 4.8% - 6/9/25 
China May trade data: exports rise after 
tariff ceasefire 

Chinese export data showed that 
exports to the US fell by the most 
since COVID, down 34% y/y, yet total 
Chinese exports ROSE by 4.8% y/y: 

The CFR’s Brad Setser posted the chart 
at right on X showing how this happened:   

Setser’s chart shows that while 
Chinese exports to the US have barely 
risen since 2018 (the first US/China trade 
war, red line), China’s trade surplus has 
risen ~$700B in that time, driven 
mostly by “Rest of World” and EU. 

10  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not only is China’s increased trade surplus in 
recent years not with the US (above, right), but 
China appears to be accelerating the dynamic: 

China removes tariffs on 53 African 
countries to increase Africa’s market 
access as Trump hikes tariffs – 6/12/25 
China Extends Africa’s Market Access as Trump 
Hikes Tariffs - Bloomberg 

Vietnam admitted as BRICS “partner 
country,” Brazil says – 6/13/25 
Vietnam admitted as BRICS 'partner country,' Brazil 
says | Reuters 

…even as the Trump Administration also tries to 
strike a trade deal with Vietnam to counterbalance 
Chinese manufacturing dominance:  

US, Vietnam near trade framework as 
deadline approaches – 6/13/25 
Trump Tariffs: US, Vietnam Near Trade Framework as Deadline Approaches - Bloomberg 

Reiterating an earlier point, we would also expect to see gold share of global FX reserves rise inexorably… <check>: 

Gold overtakes EUR as global 
reserve asset, ECB says – 6/11/25 
Gold overtakes euro as global reserve 
asset, ECB says  

Gold has overtaken the euro as the 
world’s second most important 
reserve asset for central banks, 
driven by record purchases and 
soaring prices, according to the 
European Central Bank.  Bullion 
accounted for 20 per cent of global 
official reserves last year, 
outstripping the euro’s 16 per cent 
and second only to the US dollar at 
46 per cent, data from an ECB report 
published on Wednesday showed.  

The chart at right from a recent ECB 
report shows that if you include gold 
in global FX reserves, the USD’s share 
of global FX reserves is down to 46%, 
and in a clear downtrend, with “other 
currencies” the biggest winner since 
2014. 

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 11 

 
 
 
 
And we would also expect to see Central Banks planning on still higher levels of gold reserves… <check>: 

Central Bank gold reserves survey 2025 – 6/17/25 (via TM) 
Central Bank Gold Reserves Survey 2025 | World Gold Council  

•  Similar to findings from previous surveys, central banks continue to hold favorable expectations on gold. Respondents 

overwhelmingly (95%) believe that global central bank gold reserves will increase over the next 12 months.   

•  This year, a record 43% of respondents believe that their own gold reserves will also increase over the same period. 

Interestingly, none of our respondents anticipate a decline in their gold reserves. 

Furthermore, as we noted last week, we would also expect transactions on China’s CIPS payment system to grow 
exponentially, up ~30% y/y from a year ago and up over 3x from Pettis’ 2020 X post above (denoted by the red arrow 
below)….<check>:  

12  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And we would also expect 
to see the CNY price of 
gold rising over time (red 
arrow denotes the date of 
Pettis’ 2020 X post 
above)… <check>: 

And we would also expect to see the commodity price of gold rising over time (commodities are functionally the currencies 
of Russia, OPEC+, and much of Africa)…<check>: 

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And we would also expect to see the price of gold rising v. the price of the incumbent reserve asset under the old system 
(LT USTs; gold/LT UST futures shown below, with red arrow denoting the date of Pettis’ 2020 X post above)…<check>: 

Our interpretation of the evidence is that a “more competitive currency system is taking root”, defined as “More 
currency competition featuring more local currency trade and net trade settlement in gold.” 

This means that unless the US allows the USD to fall commensurately (or more) v. gold than the CNY has been 
mechanically falling v. gold (as more CNY is used in trade and net recycled into gold, CNY should continue 
falling inexorably v. gold)…i.e., unless the USD price of gold continues rising over time, the following dynamics 
will likely occur, triggering a US and global economic crisis. 

Unless the USD continues falling v. gold as fast or faster than the CNY will continue to mechanically fall v. gold 
due to gold being used as net settlement asset for CNY-denominated trade… 

1.  The USD will strengthen v. CNY, making the US increasingly uncompetitive and shifting more US industry 

to China. 

2.  Global oil prices will fall in USD terms, making US shale uncompetitive, forcing shale production declines, 
triggering not just a US ISM Manufacturing recession, but forcing the US to import more foreign oil (a.k.a., 
export more USDs), weakening the USD anyway while also weakening the US’ energy position. 

3.  USTs will be sold by foreign creditors of the US as the USD rises, sending UST yields up further, sending 
rates above levels that will trigger UST market dysfunction and a global crisis (which we estimate to be 
somewhere above 4.6% to 4.8% on 10y UST yields). 

China appears to control the price of gold via CNY internationalization with net gold settlement.  This is secularly 
bullish for gold, especially given how few western investors even realize what has happened and is happening 
that we have laid out above.  We continue to like gold and gold miners.  Let’s watch.   

14  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
“Trade with China is becoming a one-way street” 

Trade with China is becoming a one-way street – 6/14/25 
Trade With China Is Becoming a One-Way Street - WSJ  

Trump is trying to further open up China’s market to U.S. companies as Beijing’s appetite for the rest of the world’s 
exports is diminishing 

“China’s vision of trade is exporting without importing,” said Brad Setser, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign 
Relations and a former Treasury Department official. China isn’t a realistic alternative to the U.S. as a market for 
global goods, he said. 

In volume terms, which adjust for the effect of exchange rates, Chinese imports through March haven’t grown at all 
since the end of 2022—while exports have rocketed 33% higher, according to data from the Netherlands Bureau of 
Economic Policy Analysis, a Dutch research institute. 

Tree Ring: US policymakers continue to complain about China’s imbalanced trade (massive surplus)… 

China’s trade surplus reaches a record of nearly $1 trillion – 1/12/25 
China’s Trade Surplus Reaches a Record of Nearly $1 Trillion - The New York Times 

China announced on Monday that its trade surplus reached almost $1 trillion last year as its exports swamped the 
globe, while the country’s own businesses and households spent cautiously on imports. 

When adjusted for inflation, China’s trade surplus last year far exceeded any in the world in the past century, even 
those of export powerhouses like Germany, Japan or the United States. Chinese factories are dominating global 
manufacturing on a scale not experienced by any country since the United States after World War II. 

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 15 

 
 
 
 
…but an alternative interpretation is that China’s massively imbalanced trade is simply another symptom that a 
“more competitive currency system is taking root”, defined as “More currency competition featuring more local 
currency trade and net trade settlement in gold”…with China first settling western trade deficits in commodities 
and goods that China cannot produce themselves (semiconductors, energy, food, commodities)… 

China is still a major importer, pulling in some $2.6 trillion in 2024, compared with the U.S.’s $3.4 trillion. Its biggest import—
and in Xi’s eyes, a source of vulnerability for China—was semiconductors, including those sold by such U.S. companies 
as Qualcomm. China also imports a lot of energy and food, benefiting U.S. companies such as the commodities giant Cargill 
and the gas exporter Cheniere Energy. 

Trade with China is becoming a one-way street – 6/14/25 
Trade With China Is Becoming a One-Way Street - WSJ  

…and, once China’s needs for 
foreign goods are satiated, 
China is settling its net trade 
surplus with the world 
(approximated by the gap 
between “exports” and “imports” in 
the chart on page above) in gold: 

Translation: The issue is NOT 
that China is exporting far more 
than it imports, the issue is that 
gold is not being allowed to rise 
to the price that would balance 
China’s trade… 

i.e., China’s record trade 
surplus is a symptom of the 
fact that western currencies are 
wildly overvalued v. gold. 

If we divide China’s 2024 trade surplus above ($990B) by the 1,384 tonnes of gold imports above, we find exactly 
how overvalued “wildly overvalued” is: $990B ÷ 1,384 metric tonnes = $22,248 per OUNCE of gold.  

TRANSLATION: If the US is unwilling to allow gold to rise markedly in USD, then US and US/China trade will likely 
remain very “one-way”, until China empties the west of its gold.  If the US allows gold to rise markedly in USD, 
the USD will weaken notably v. CNY (and likely v. JPY as well, and the EUR to a lesser extent), which would drive 
higher US inflation… 

…but which would also a) provide the appropriate economic incentive for the US to reshore its defense industrial 
base, and b) give Sec. Bessent a much higher gold price to write US gold up to, increasing the windfall that 
would be deposited into the Treasury General Account (TGA), which would allow him to de-leverage the US 
debt/GDP more meaningfully.  As a reminder, every ~$4,000 per oz. would deposit an incremental $1T into the 
TGA with which Bessent could “buy down” US debt/GDP.  Let’s watch. 

16  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
“How the Federal Reserve fuels profligacy” 

How the Federal Reserve fuels fiscal profligacy – 6/15/25 
How the Federal Reserve Fuels Fiscal Profligacy - WSJ 

If Republicans are serious about reducing federal deficit spending, it is important to consider the effect the Federal 
Reserve has on the nation’s budgetary outlook. If the numerical models imposed by the Congressional Budget Office 
drive fiscal policy, lawmakers also need to understand what they portend for monetary policy. 

The Fed once was committed to “normalizing” its balance sheet—shrinking its footprint in credit markets by reducing 
the size of its portfolio of Treasury debt and mortgage-backed securities. Chairman Jerome Powell noted in a 2019 
speech that large-scale asset purchases by the Fed over the previous 10 years had been viewed from the outset as 
“extraordinary measures to be unwound, or ‘normalized,’ when conditions ultimately warranted.” 

Tree Ring: The WSJ op-ed by former Fed nominee Judy Shelton made some great points on the historical context of how 
the Fed has essentially helped US fiscal profligacy, a point made even more pointedly in 2015 by former Dallas Fed 
President Richard Fisher: 

Debt held by public, if you multiply that by a big number you get total US off-balance sheet liabilities.  The Fed has taken out 
the urgency to finance those liabilities by suppressing the yield curve, but we cannot continue to count on the Central Bank 
underwriting the government…We [the Fed] have been suppressing the yield curve – if rates rise, it’s a ticking time bomb. 

“Paying for the Past” – 2015 Peterson Institute Fiscal Summit – 5/19/15 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pfpEHwARhvc  

However, in the context of “a more competitive currency system taking root…where we go from a system that overly relies 
on the dollar to one where several major currencies compete with each other, which would impose both incentives and 
constraints on countries that issue those currencies,” per the head of the PBOC earlier, the above implies the need for 
significant new “price insensitive” balance sheet to finance ongoing US “fiscal profligacy”… 

…which brought us to the following section of Shelton’s op-ed above, which suggests the US CBO 
(Congressional Budget Office) is projecting the Fed’s balance sheet to more than DOUBLE to $9.9T by 2035: 

But according to CBO estimates, the Fed won’t be reducing its holdings of Treasury securities over the next decade. Instead, it 
will increase them significantly. The Fed owns $4.2 trillion in U.S. government debt in the form of Treasury bills, notes and 
bonds.  

The CBO projects the Fed’s holdings of Treasurys will climb to $9.9 trillion in 2035—more than double today’s amount. 

The CBO is saying the quiet part out loud about HOW “a more competitive currency system taking root…where 
we go from a system that overly relies on the dollar to one where several major currencies compete with each 
other, which would impose both incentives and constraints on countries that issue those currencies” that led to 
currencies trading more on a balance of payments basis would make the USD the “dirtiest dirty shirt”. 

Here's how (turn the page):  

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If “a more competitive currency system taking root…where we go from a system that overly relies on the dollar to 
one where several major currencies compete with each other, which would impose both incentives and 
constraints on countries that issue those currencies”…then the US is going to need to either slash fiscal 
spending or find a new source of “price insensitive” balance sheet to finance US fiscal profligacy.   

Critically, we just witnessed DOGE’s complete inability to slash spending (and are witnessing in real time that 
spending is no object when it comes to Iran/Israel tensions), so the CBO is telling us that the US government is 
counting on the Fed to at least partially finance marginal deficits over the next 10 years. 

And so since we frequently are told “The US will just be like Japan” regarding its fiscal profligacy, in the context 
of the CBO’s surprising comment, we will highlight the chart below and ask a simple question: If the Fed’s 
balance sheet “is just like the Bank of Japan’s over the next 10 years” (goes from 23% to 130%), what assets 
would YOU want to own? 

US Fed Balance Sheet as % of GDP 
v. BOJ Balance Sheet as % of GDP (leading 10 years)
Sources: FFTT, Fed, BOJ

140%

120%

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

Fed Balance Sheet

BOJ Balance Sheet

We continue to be overweight gold, BTC, gold miners, and industrial equities.  When the US government… 

a)  Shows you they cannot cut much spending at all (as DOGE ineffectiveness just proved);  

b)  Then throws months of DOGE drama out the window due to the Iran/Israel tensions;  

c)  Then tells you they are counting on the Fed to marginally finance US fiscal profligacy over the next 10 

years, we recommend you believe them. 

Let’s watch.   

18  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
“…stablecoins could grow into a $3.7T market by 2030 [up 14x from today’s levels].” -Treasury Sec. Bessent 

Tree Ring: This week, the Senate passed the GENIUS 
Act stablecoin bill… 

Senate passes landmark GENIUS Act stablecoin 
bill – 6/17/25 
Senate passes landmark GENIUS Act stablecoin bill  

That same day, Treasury Sec. Bessent posted the 
following on X (right), noting that stablecoins could grow 
into a $3.7 trillion market by the end of the decade, up 
from ~$250B today, implying a rise of ~14x in stablecoin 
market cap just over five years, which “will drive demand 
from the private sector for USTs, which back 
stablecoins.” 

As if Bessent’s comments above were not interesting enough on their own, the very next day, Bessent said the following 
on the “Pod Force One” podcast:  

Speaker 1: Because crypto, I mean that seems to be a threat to the dollar, doesn't it? 

Sec. Bessent: I think it's the opposite.  I think stablecoins could reinforce dollar supremacy because with stablecoins, 
stablecoins could end up being one of the largest buyers of US treasuries or T-bills. So all of a sudden if you are using a 
stablecoin in Nigeria that's backed by the US dollar, you don't actually have to have dollars. It's on your phone, you can 
transact. So I think there's a very good chance that crypto is actually one of the things that locks in dollar supremacy. 

Speaker 1: And is that why it was crucial that Donald Trump get involved in crypto rather than trying to constrain it like Joe 
Biden 

Sec. Bessent: Was? Well, I think constraints too mild a word, I think make it extinct. 

So this administration's commitment to digital assets, it's innovation because there's so many other things that happen around 
digital assets. And also it's one of those things that it's one of the most important phenomenons that's happening in the world. 
And the US just ignored it. And what we are doing, the very good bill that may get voted on the Senate next week, week after 
that will give us, will bring crypto and digital assets and make the US the leader.  

So just as we're the leader in AI, just as we are the leader in biomedicine, we will become the leader in this on the technology 
side and here led by Treasury, led by some great leadership and the Senate, and this is bipartisan. There may be 16 
Democrats who are going to vote with Republicans on this bill, which so it tells you how the inclination toward crypto was 
there. It was just the White House.  

The previous administration wanted to kill it. So once we get this bill passed the US, we can put our best standards and 
practices out to the world. It won't be something that happens in a Caribbean island. It won't be something that is used for 
nefarious purposes or primarily used for nefarious purposes in the Middle East. 

Pod Force One: One-on-One with Scott Bessent – 6/18/25 
One-on-One with Scott Bessent: Tariff Derangement Syndrome, Elon Musk Feud, and the Royal Family  

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 19 

 
 
 
 
 
Several of Bessent’s comments above caught our eye, starting with his example of someone in Nigeria being able to sell 
Nigeria Naira (NGN) to buy USD-denominated stablecoins.  Allow us to pull on that thread.  Selling NGN to buy USD-
backed stablecoins would likely drive the NGN down further against the USD over time, strengthening the USD system as 
noted by Bessent.  But now imagine you are a Nigerian holding USD stablecoins… 

The red line below is USDNGN; it shows that the USD has risen by 299% v. NGN in the past 5 years.  So far, so 
good – you are happy you swapped NGN for USD… until your countrymen point out that the BTC they bought 
with USD stablecoins is up 4,600% in NGN terms over the same time frame (blue line)!  i.e., USD stablecoin 
expansion will likely drive USD up v. EM currencies, and it will likely drive BTC up massively v. USD! 

How high could BTC go if USD stablecoin 
market cap goes to $3.7T by the end of the 
decade?   

Over the past four years, BTC’s market cap 
has been as low as 2.5x and as high as 10x 
the total stablecoin market cap, so $3.7T x 
2.5 = $9.25T BTC market cap (up from $2.1T 
today); $3.7T x 10x = $37T (up from $2.1T 
today.) 

Whoa. 

20  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

Source: TBAC 

 
 
 
 
When we read the Bessent stablecoin comments above, our minds immediately returned to a panel we were part of last 
July, during which we were told that somebody famous had been told by Trump that “Bitcoin is the new oil”:  

Peter McCormack: ... tell you an interesting Trump 
story from last night, and I won't dox the other 
person because it's unfair on them, but we were at a 
party last night and we were chatting to somebody 
and their father is a very, very famous person. I'll tell 
you offline. 

Trump's orange-pilled this person. So people are 
saying, "Oh, Trump's just here for our votes." No.  

So this is somebody, they've been trying to orange-
pill for years, right?  We were chatting to him last 
night and he said, "Yeah, dad's in now." I was like, 
"What?" He's like, "Yeah." 

Danny Knowles: Trump called him up. 

Peter McCormack: Trump called up. Trump called 
him up and he said, 'Yeah, Bitcoin, it's the new oil.'" 
And they're in. 

Regarding Bessent’s stablecoin comments, think of stablecoins as “oil priced only in USD per the 1973 
Petrodollar arrangement as a means of financing US deficits”…we think this is what Trump meant by “BTC is the 
new oil” per above… 

In our view, if the GENIUS Act is passed, it suggests much higher BTC prices over time, as a condition to both 
weakening the USD (v. BTC) while strengthening the USD system, something Bessent and Trump have stated is a 
goal. 

Bigger picture, in our view the fact that Bessent is so explicitly discussing stablecoins as a means of expanding 
available private sector balance sheet to buy UST T-Bills is secularly inflationary – it points to a more elegant 
manner of shifting UST issuance to the front end and financial repression of T-Bill holders than simply shifting 
the UST issuance to the front end like Yellen did in 4q23.  

It suggests the release valves will be BTC, and to a lesser extent equities and other asset prices.   

In our view, using T-Bill backed stablecoins to finance US deficits was necessitated by DOGE’s practical failure, 
which showed the only way the US government can make its fiscal math work is to: 

a)  Grow nominal GDP well above UST rates, and;  

b)  Finance more of US deficits at near-0% rates, in T-Bill markets. 

Both a) and b) should over time offer a tailwind to secular inflation, and critically, Bessent has now advocated 
both of these points in the last couple weeks.   

Let’s watch.   

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 21 

 
 
 
 
 
“Pres. Trump has secured a perpetual Golden Share as part of Nippon Steel’s acquisition of US Steel” 

Nippon Steel closes its $14.1B acquisition of US Steel – 6/18/25 
Nippon Steel Closes Its $14.1 Billion Acquisition of US Steel (X) - Bloomberg 

Tree Ring: Commerce Secretary Lutnick this week 
noted that President Trump had secured a “perpetual 
Golden Share” for the US as part of Nippon Steel’s 
acquisition of US Steel, finishing the X post with a 
“Congratulations”, stating it was “The Art of the Deal”… 

What Lutnick left out (or did not realize?) is that what 
Trump did was “The Art of the Chinese Deal”, as the 
WSJ was highlighting (and complaining about) 
China’s “Golden Shares” over two years ago:   

China’s new way to control its biggest 
companies: Golden Shares – 3/8/23, via PA 
China’s New Way to Control Its Biggest Companies: 
Golden Shares - WSJ  

In its uneasy dance with China’s private sector, the 
Communist Party is moving away from a public 
battle with some of the country’s biggest companies. 
Instead, it is inching toward a quieter form of control. 

At the center of the effort is a push by various levels 
of government to take stakes in the private 
companies that have long driven Chinese innovation 
and job creation. 

The government stakes are sometimes very small, 
like the 1% holding that a fund of Beijing’s cyberspace 
watchdog recently took in the digital-media unit of e-
commerce giant Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. But they 
tend to give the government board seats, voting 
power and sway over business decisions. 
Colloquially, they are known as golden shares. 

For the companies, there is little choice: Selling such a stake to a government entity that seeks one is crucial for staying in 
business. For the state, the stakes mean more direct involvement in some of China’s most high-profile companies—digital 
cornerstones of Chinese life and, in some cases, darlings of global investors. 

Once we get over the irony of Lutnick celebrating a Chinese strategy as “The Art of the Deal”, we can evaluate the deal on 
its merits.  In our view, such a move is a necessary strategy because the past 25 years have empirically shown 
that trying to implement free trade with China while they are using “Golden Shares”, etc. is like walking around a 
bad neighborhood wearing a sign that says “Mug Me” (h/t MS). 

HOWEVER: If this deal is indicative of investment deals to come in the US, they suggest a change to the 
structure of post-1971 USD reserve status, because those rules are clear: The US must have a completely open 
capital account, and the US maintaining “Golden Shares” of foreign investment is essentially “US capitalism with 
Chinese capitalism characteristics”…this likely bodes well for gold in USD, just like it bodes well for gold in CNY. 

22  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
Furthermore, this was not the only example of “US capitalism with Chinese capitalism characteristics” in recent days.  Last 
week, the US Army enlisted the Chief Technology Officers from Meta, Palantir, and other private sector corporations.  The 
line between the US military and US corporations has been increasingly blurred in the past 25 years, but we are not sure 
we can recall another example of so explicit a marriage between the two: 

New Army Reserve unit enlists tech executives from Meta, Palantir – 6/13/25 
New Army Reserve Unit Enlists Tech Executives From Meta, Palantir - WSJ  

The chief technology officers from Palantir and Meta Platforms—Shyam Sankar and Andrew “Boz” Bosworth, 
respectively—will join Kevin Weil and Bob McGrew of OpenAI pedigree to make up the inaugural cohort of a new 
Army innovation corps. 

We will be interested to see if the “Golden Share” dynamics are also used for the potential $8B acquisition of Aethon by 
Mitsubishi; if it is, we will have more conviction what we wrote above about the US transitioning to “US capitalism with 
Chinese capitalism characteristics”: 

Mitsubishi Corp. in talks for $8B US shale acquisition, source says – 6/16/25 
Mitsubishi Corp in talks for $8 billion US shale acquisition, source says | Reuters  

Mitsubishi said in advanced talks to buy Aethon for $8B – 6/17/25 
Mitsubishi Said in Advanced Talks to Buy Aethon for $8 Billion - Bloomberg  

Mitsubishi Corp. is in advanced talks to buy the assets of Aethon Energy Management for close to $8 billion, people 
familiar with the matter said, in what would be the Japanese conglomerate’s biggest ever acquisition. 

Tokyo-based Mitsubishi could announce a deal with the US energy-focused investment firm in the next couple of 
months, according to the people. Abu Dhabi National Oil Co. had also been considering a potential transaction 
involving Aethon, Bloomberg News reported in April. 

A deal would likely be structured as a purchase of Aethon’s portfolio, which includes natural gas production 
operations and midstream assets, some of the people said. While a deal is close, talks could still be delayed or falter, 
they said, asking not to be identified discussing confidential information. It’s also possible another bidder could 
emerge for Aethon, they added. 

A likely corollary to “US capitalism with Chinese capitalism characteristics” over time featuring more state involvement (as 
a “Golden Share” implies) would be fewer defaults of “Systemically Important Institutions”…up until now, only banks have 
really qualified as “TBTF” in the US…but if the US pursues “US capitalism with Chinese capitalism characteristics”, that 
would conceivably become more like China as well, where of late there have been no corporate bond defaults:  

Corporate bond defaults disappear from China’s onshore market – 6/15/25 
Corporate bond defaults disappear from China’s onshore market  

As China grapples with a trade war, a four-year property slowdown and lingering weakness in consumer confidence, 
one typical gauge of corporate distress has been conspicuous by its absence.  

There has been only one first-time default in China’s $4tn onshore corporate bond market so far this year, according 
to data from S&P Ratings. That compares with 16 in 2024 as a whole, and multiple defaults by this stage in every 
year since 2013.  

Rather than a definitive indication of corporate distress across the economy, the absence of defaults points to a 
marked change in tone during the recent development of China’s financial markets. A 21st century move closer 
towards international norms, for which the US was both a driving force and a blueprint, appears in many areas to 
have lost momentum.  

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 23 

 
 
 
Instead, amid a bleaker economic outlook and a geopolitical rift with Washington over trade, the domestic focus has 
shifted to stability.  

“There was a trend [of] normalizing towards global rates [of default], but that trend started to reverse itself recently, 
particularly during and after Covid, as systemic risk concerns became more of a worry for the government,” said 
Charles Chang, Greater China country lead at S&P.  The government had “taken a step back” from a “normally 
functioning bond market”, he added. 

Ying Wang, a managing director at Fitch Ratings, said in a written comment that China’s bond market was, other than 
financial institutions, “predominantly composed of state-owned issuers”. She added that central and provincial 
governments had emphasized “minimizing public bond defaults among state-owned enterprises to mitigate systemic 
risk, often prioritizing bond repayment over private debt obligations”. 

Another analyst, who asked to remain anonymous, said that after a lot of “cleaning up of debt”, the bond market was 
“now more the domain of the state-owned companies”, and that credit quality had improved “as a consequence of 
that”. The person added that “implicit government support tends to be highest when the economic picture is more 
uncertain”, and was currently likely to be “incredibly strong given the economic backdrop”. 

As the US seemingly tilts towards “US capitalism with Chinese capitalism characteristics”, it suggests some second 
derivative implications:  

1. 

In trade war and wartime, the real value of bonds and traditional free market economy and capital flow rules are 
thrown under the bus.  Caveat emptor. 

2.  As it relates to the Chinese example above, “Extend and pretend” tactics tend to occur late in crises, rather than 

early (consider US actions in late 2008 with short selling bans, and the Fed buying corporate bonds in summer 
2020 after the worst of COVID). 

3.  For China, the release valve is the currency, but against gold (below); it appears to us that the US has been 

making preparations for the release valve to be the USD, but against gold (big gold imports earlier this year) and 
BTC (per earlier).   

Let’s watch.   

24  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Trump’s trade and tax policies start to stall US battery boom” 

Trump’s trade and tax policies start to stall US battery boom – 6/17/25 
Trump’s Trade and Tax Policies Start to Stall U.S. Battery Boom - The New York Times  

Battery manufacturing began to take off in the United States in recent years after Congress and the Biden 
administration offered the industry generous incentives, but that boom now appears to be stalling as the Trump 
administration and Republican lawmakers try to restrict China’s access to the American market. 

From South Carolina to Washington State, companies are slowing construction or reconsidering big investments in 
factories for producing rechargeable batteries and the ingredients needed to make them. 

A big reason is that higher trade barriers between the United States and China are fracturing relationships between 
suppliers and customers in the two countries. At the same time, Republicans are seeking to block battery makers with 
ties to China, as well as those that rely on any Chinese technology or materials, from taking advantage of federal tax 
credits. The industry is also dealing with a softening market for electric vehicles, which Republicans and Mr. Trump 
have targeted. 

Tree Ring: The US appears to be tilting toward “US capitalism with Chinese capitalism characteristics”, but the story 
above (and others like it) suggest that the US has so far been much less successful than China thus far.   

The story above highlights a core problem the US faces in trying to reshore its defense industrial base: We need 
to create operational certainty for these types of investments ("We are going to offer these incentives for the next 
10 years or until we are competitive with China, inflation be damned")...but the problem is the bond market would 
crash that afternoon if we announced that.  

At some point, as a nation, we have to decide what we want...and the problem is that Washington and Wall Street 
are still trying to serve two masters: Reshore the US defense industrial base AND maintain the real value of the 
bond market…but Washington and Wall Street cannot serve both masters.  

China can serve both masters because it runs a surplus, it has capital controls, and has set up a system of gold 
convertibility for foreign trading partners.  The US could choose to do that as well, but it would require the US to 
end USD reserve status as it has been structured since 1971, and move back to a USD reserve status that 
features a neutral reserve asset like pre-1971, except at a floating price (gold or BTC).  (Note it appears the US is 
attempting to set up such a system of gold and/or BTC convertibility at a floating price in USD). 

Finally, the story also highlights a consistent problem we have seen with how Wall Street and Washington DC are 
attacking this problem: They think supply chains and skilled labor can get printed, and so they completely mess 
up the order of operations needed, the lead times and timelines needed, the supply chains needed, etc. 

We can go slow on reshoring the defense industrial base and financially repress the US bond market a little, or 
we can go fast on reshoring the defense industrial base and financially repress the US bond market a lot, but 
there is no option where we can reshore the defense industrial base and maintain the real value of the bond 
market.  We must choose. 

Our preferred holdings in such an environment remain gold, BTC, T-Bills, and US electrical infrastructure and industrial 
equities…because to our eyes, US actions with gold (imports earlier this year; no tariffs on gold), and on 
stablecoins (and likely therefore BTC), suggests the US has chosen “repress bonds, inflate the system, and 
reshore.” 

Let’s watch.   

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 25 

 
 
“Israel is running low on defensive interceptors, official says”  

Israel is running low on defensive interceptors, official says – 6/18/25 
Exclusive | Israel Is Running Low on Defensive Interceptors, Official Says - WSJ  

Israel is running low on defensive Arrow interceptors, according to a U.S. official, raising concern about the country’s 
ability to counter long-range ballistic missiles from Iran if the conflict isn’t resolved soon. 

The U.S. has been aware of the capacity problems for months, the official said, and Washington has been 
augmenting Israel’s defenses with systems on the ground, at sea and in the air. Since the conflict escalated in June, 
the Pentagon has sent more missile defense assets into the region, and now there is concern about the U.S. burning 
through interceptors as well. 

“Neither the U.S. nor the Israelis can continue to sit and intercept missiles all day,” said Tom Karako, director of the 
Missile Defense Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “The Israelis and their friends need to 
move with all deliberate haste to do whatever needs to be done, because we cannot afford to sit and play catch.”  

Tree Ring: Israel is reportedly running low on air defense missiles, with the WaPo reporting that Israel may only be able to 
sustain their current level of missile defense for another 10-12 days (which would explain why Israel has been so vocal 
about more American help despite the western media consensus suggesting that Israel is easily defeating Iran):  

Israel-Iran conflict may last only as long as their missiles hold out – 6/17/25 
Israel-Iran conflict may last only as long as their missiles hold out - The Washington Post 

In contrast, on Thursday of this week, an Israeli official told NBC that Iran could continue to fire missiles at its current rate 
for as much as another 5 months…to state the obvious, last we checked 5 months is longer than 10-12 days:  

Israeli Official: Iran can likely sustain the current rate of missile fire at Israel for possibly as long as 5 months, provided that 
their missile launchers are not destroyed – NBC, 6/19/25 

And so for the second time in three years, we find ourselves observing a proxy war between the west and a BRICS oil 
exporter, in which missiles/drones are being revealed to be a key weapon…and no one can make missiles and drones 
faster than China…so whoever’s side China is on, presumably has the advantage:   

America has no Ukraine Plan B, except more war – 3/24/24 
America has no Ukraine Plan B except more war - Asia Times 

China claims that it has automated plants that can make 1,000 cruise missiles a day—not impossible given that it can 
manufacture 1,000 EVs a day, or thousands of 5G base stations.  

The implication is that China can produce the equivalent of America’s inventory of 4,000 cruise missiles in a week 
while American defense contractors take years to assemble them by hand. 

No one disputed the data I presented. And no one believed that Russia is taking 25,000 casualties a month. Facts 
weren’t the issue: The assembled dignitaries, a representative sampling of the foreign policy establishment’s 
intellectual and executive leadership, simply couldn’t imagine a world in which America no longer gave the orders.  

They are accustomed to running things and they will gamble the world away to keep their position.  

26  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, it’s not just about China’s ability to make missiles (per the prior article), but to make lots of other goods… 

China’s long march through the Global South – 7/22/24 
China’s Long March through the Global South - Asia Times 

China has gotten many things wrong, but it got two big things right.  The first is AI applications to manufacturing. It 
can produce a $9,000 electric vehicle at a profit, or 2,400 5G base stations a day in a plant with 50 workers – I saw 
this. It also claims to have a factory that can make 1,000 cruise missile motors a day.  

We can’t produce enough artillery shells to supply Ukraine. China can make as many ship-killer missiles as it 
wants. That’s the biggest change in relative firepower since muskets replaced crossbows. A US destroyer can carry 
100 missile interceptors. There’s no limit to how many missiles China can launch from the mainland. We talk about 
prioritizing China: With what?  We’re just rearranging the deck guns on the Titanic. 

China has 3 million 5G base stations. We have 100,000. China dominates key industries—telecom infrastructure, 
EVs, solar power, drones, steel and shipbuilding — and it’s aiming at semiconductors. Biden’s Treasury Secretary 
goes to China and says, “Please, you’ve got too much industrial capacity, don’t export so much!” What about OUR 
capacity? 

…including rare earth magnets, without which no one’s high-tech weapons can work…and China appears to be cutting off 
rare earth magnet exports (below)… 

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 27 

 
 
 
…as the issue of military-used rare earths reportedly remains unresolved in the US/China trade deal… 

MILITARY-USE RARE EARTH ISSUES UNRESOLVED IN US-CHINA PACT:RTRS – 6/15/25 

…and as what appears to be a global scramble for rare earths intensifies, with the US discussing essentially selling USTs 
to fund rare earths mines: 

US Ex-Im bank may fund Greenland rare earths mine, Reuters says – Bloomberg – 6/15/25 
US Ex-Im Bank May Fund Greenland Rare Earths Mine, Reuters Says - Bloomberg 

…and as India reportedly moves to conserve its rare earths by seeking a halt to Japan exports:  

India moves to conserve its rare earths, seeks halt to Japan exports, sources say – 6/15/25 
Exclusive: India moves to conserve its rare earths, seeks halt to Japan exports, sources say | Reuters  

All of this then leads us to a few thoughts: 

1.  China is being shown to have more leverage than appreciated, yet again, by virtue of its rare earth 

dominance specifically and manufacturing dominance more broadly – China appears to be in the 
“kingmaker” position, where no one can go to war for long without China’s supply chain support. 

2.  Former Blackwater chief Erik Prince and analyst/author Andrei Martyanov views that the nature of war 

has completely changed appear to be further vindicated – missiles, drones, and subs are the key, while 
trillions of dollars of more expensive platforms appear increasingly “obsolescent” as Prince termed it.   

3.  We get the strong sense, supported by credible rumblings and Israeli and US officials’ own comments, 
that the war may not be going nearly as well for Israel as western mainstream media is telling us. 

4. 

It is possible that Israel is going to run out of air defense missiles in 10-12 days, while Iran reportedly has 
another 5 months of supplies, and possibly support from China; as investors, this gives us a hard 
deadline on a potential “mother of all black swans (MOABS).” 

5.  What do we mean by “MOABS”?  If Israel is faced with a situation where it cannot defend itself from 
Iranian ballistic missiles sometime in the next 10-12 days, what will Israel do?  Would they consider 
launching nuclear weapons at Iran?  If so, then what happens?  We do not know, but we hear credible 
rumblings that very serious people in the US intelligence community are pondering these very questions. 

We are surprised how quickly this conflict has seemed to have gone “from zero to 60”; we are not the only ones.  We 
hope cooler heads and peace prevail.  Importantly, for investor purposes, we seem to have a hard date for when 
things could get really spicy – sometime in the next 10-12 days…especially given Trump saying last night he 
would make a decision on bombing Iran within two weeks:  

Trump says he’ll decide on Iran strike within two weeks – 6/20/25 
Trump says he’ll decide on Iran strike within two weeks - The Washington Post 

In our view, the MOABS would be good for USD and gold, but little else. Ultimately though, we are not trying to trade this, 
as it is too uncertain, too volatile, and too political…especially given that we are unlevered (so we can be patient) and that 
war is always inflationary, so we have a pretty good idea for how this will ultimately effect markets. If we were levered 
and/or managing a monthly/quarterly book, we would be getting very low over our skis for the next several weeks. 

Let’s watch.  Thank you for reading this edition of Tree Rings.  Have a great weekend!  LG   
28  • FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Copyright 2025, FFTT LLC. 

DISCLOSURES:   

FFTT, LLC (“FFTT”), is an independent research firm.  FFTT’s reports are based upon information gathered from various 
sources believed to be reliable but are not guaranteed as to accuracy or completeness.  The analysis or 
recommendations contained in the reports, if any, represent the true opinions of the author.  The views expressed in the 
reports are not knowingly false and do not omit material facts that would make them misleading.  No part of the author’s 
compensation was, is, or will be, directly or indirectly, related to the specific recommendations or views about any and all 
of the subject securities or issuers.  However, there are risks in investing.  Any individual report is not all-inclusive and 
does not contain all of the information that you may desire in making an investment decision.  You must conduct and rely 
on your own evaluation of any potential investment and the terms of its offering, including the merits and risks involved in 
making a decision to invest.   

The information in this report is not intended to be, and shall not constitute, an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to 
buy any security or investment product or service. The information in this report is subject to change without notice, and 
FFTT assumes no responsibility to update the information contained in this report.  The publisher and/or its individual 
officers, employees, or members of their families might, from time to time, have a position in the securities mentioned and 
may purchase or sell these securities in the future.  The publisher and/or its individual officers, employees, or members of 
their families might, from time to time, have financial interests with affiliates of companies whose securities have been 
discussed in this publication.  

For more information on receiving Forest for the Trees and Tree Rings: 

FFTT, LLC.  
Email:  Info@FFTT-LLC.com 

FFTT TREE RINGS  JUNE 20, 2025 • 29 

 
 
 
 
 
